
---CHUNK---
Textbook for Class VII
Social Science
Social and Political Life – II
2024-25
2024-25
Textbook for Class VII
Social Science
Social and Political Life – II
2024-25
First Edition	
	
	
	
February 2007    Phalguna 1928
Reprinted
February 2008, March  2009,    
January 2010, December 2010,  
January 2012, November 2012,  
November 2013, December 2014, 
January 2016, January 2017,   
December 2017, January 2019,  
January 2020, March 2021,  
August 2021 and November 2021 
Revised Edition	
	
	
	
November 2022 Kartika 1944
Reprinted	
	
	
	
March 2024 Chaitra 1946
PD 575T SU
©	National Council of Educational 
Research and Training, 2007, 2022
` 65.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT 
watermark
Published at the Publication Division 
by the Secretary, National Council  
o f  E d u c a t i o n a l  R e s e a r c h  a n d 
T r a i n i n g ,  S r i  A u r o b i n d o  M a r g , 
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at Arun 
Packers & Printers, C-36 Lawrence 
Road Industrial Area, Delhi 110 035 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
	 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the 
publisher.
	 This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade, 
be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s 
consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
	 The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised 
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is 
incorrect and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication	
:	 Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Editor	
:	 Shveta Uppal
Chief Production	
:	 Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business	
:	 Amitabh Kumar 
Manager (In charge)
Assistant Editor	
:	 Shashi Chadha
Assistant  Production 	 :	 Rajesh Pippal 
Officer
Cover
Fatma Nasir
 Layout 
Orijit Sen with Splash Communications
Illustrations
Orijit Sen
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION  
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016	
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road 
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangaluru 560 085	
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan 
Ahmedabad 380 014	
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114	
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon  
Guwahati 781 021	
Phone :  0361-2674869	
0764 – Social and Political Life–II 
Textbook for Class VII
ISBN  81-7450-672-1
2024-25
Foreword
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s 
life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks 
a departure from the legacy of bookish learning, which continues to shape our 
system and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi 
and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this 
basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of 
sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures will 
take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of education 
outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and 
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and 
to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that given 
space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the 
information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as 
the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and 
sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we 
perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed 
body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning. 
Flexibility in the daily timetable is as necessary as rigour in implementing the 
annual calendar so that the required number of teaching days is actually devoted 
to teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine 
how effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy 
experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have 
tried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting 
knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for child psychology and 
the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by 
giving higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, 
discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates 
the hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this 
book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in Social Sciences, 
Professor Hari Vasudevan, the Chief Advisor, Sarada Balagopalan and the Advisor, 
Arvind Sardana for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers contributed 
to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making 
this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have 
generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and personnel. 
2024-25
vi
We are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring 
Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher 
Education, Ministry of Human Resources Development under the 
Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, 
for their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation committed to 
systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its products, 
NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to 
undertake further revision and refinement. 
Director
New Delhi	
National Council of Educational
20 November 2006	
Research and Training
2024-25
vii
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content 
load on students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises 
reducing the content load and providing opportunities for experiential 
learning with creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has 
undertaken the exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes. 
Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT across classes 
have been taken into consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of 
the following:
•	 Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in 
the same class
•	 Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same 
subject
•	 Difficulty level
•	 Content, which is easily accessible to students without much 
interventions from teachers and can be learned by children through 
self-learning or peer-learning
•	 Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes 
given above.
Rationalisation of Content in the 
Textbooks
2024-25
Constitution of India
Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
	 (a)	 to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the 
National Flag and the National Anthem;
	 (b)	 to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national 
struggle for freedom;
	 (c)	 to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
	 (d)	 to defend the country and render national service when called upon to 
do so;
	 (e)	 to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst 
all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional 
or sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity 
of women;
	 (f)	 to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
	 (g)	 to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, 
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
 (h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry 
and reform;
	 (i)	 to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
	 (j)	 to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective 
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour 
and achievement;
*	(k)	 who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education 
to his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and 
fourteen years.
Note: 	 The Article 51A containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution (42nd 
Amendment) Act, 1976 (with effect from 3 January 1977).
	
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with effect from 
1 April 2010).
Part IV A (Article 51 A)
2024-25
Textbook Development Committee
Chairperson, Advisory Committee for Social Science Textbooks at the Upper 
Primary Level
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta, Kolkata
Chief Advisor
Sarada Balagopalan, Centre for the Study of Developing Societies (CSDS), Rajpur 
Road, Delhi
Advisor
Arvind Sardana, Eklavya–Institute for Educational Research and Innovative 
Action, Madhya Pradesh
Members
Anjali Monteiro, Professor, Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai
Anjali Noronha, Eklavya – Institute for Educational Research and Innovative 
Action, Madhya Pradesh
Anuradha Sen, H-701, Som Vihar, R.K. Puram, New Delhi
Dipta Bhog, Nirantar – Centre for Gender and Education, New Delhi
Krishna Menon, Reader, Lady Shri Ram College, New Delhi
Latika Gupta, Consultant, Department of Elementary Education (DEE), NCERT
M.V. Srinivasan, Lecturer, Department of Education in Social Sciences and 
Humanities (DESSH), NCERT
Malini Ghose, Nirantar – Centre for Gender and Education, New Delhi
Mary E. John, Director, Centre for Women’s Development Studies (CWDS), 
New Delhi
N.B. Sarojini, Sama – Resource Group for Women and Health, New Delhi
Rangan Chakravarty, A 4/7, Golf Green Urban Complex, Phase 1, Kolkata
Sanjay Dubey, Reader, DESSH, NCERT
Shobha Bajpai, Government Middle School, Uda, District Harda, Madhya Pradesh
Sukanya Bose, Eklavya Research Fellow, 66 F Sector 8, Jasola Vihar, New Delhi
Member-coordinator
Malla V.S.V. Prasad, Lecturer, DESSH, NCERT
2024-25
Acknowledgements
This book has benefited from its association 
with several individuals and institutions. These 
include Poonam Batra, Piu Dutt, S. Mohinder and 
Aditya Nigam who read most of the chapters in the 
book and gave us helpful feedback. In addition, 
Rajeev Bhargav, Kaushik Ghosh, Anu Gupta, 
Sunil and A.V. Ramani discussed ideas and 
commented on particular chapters. V.Geetha was 
gracious in agreeing to read all of the chapters 
and her extensive comments have enriched  
this book substantially. Anjali Monteiro and  
S. Shankar shared with us their ideas on the 
media at different stages and helped us expand 
upon that particular chapter in meaningful ways. 
Smriti Vohra also agreed to do some last 
minute editing without realising how much she 
had taken on, and we thank her for her time and 
careful editing. Similar to his role in the Class 
VI book, Alex George has been of significant 
help with his insights, ideas and information. 
Urvashi Butalia continues to be generous with 
her time and willingness to serve as editor, 
thereby ensuring that this text has gained from 
her perceptive reading.
We thank Zubaan for allowing us to use poster 
images from their book Poster Women: A Visual 
History of the Women’s Movement in India. We 
would also like to thank Trimurti Films Private 
Ltd. for allowing the use of the Deewar clip. 
Partners For Law and Development graciously 
allowed us to use their image on page 63. The 
Principal, teachers and students of Class VI B at 
the Kendriya Vidyalaya II at Hindon, Ghaziabad 
readily agreed to work on the wallpaper and the 
collage that we have used in the book and were 
kind in allowing us to photograph this as well. 
We would also like to thank Geetanjali, Sr. PRO, 
Northern Railway, for the public advertisement 
and the UNDP India for the material about 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  
M. Quraishy at SARAI also extended his help 
when required and we thank him for this.
The photographs that this book uses were 
procured from various sources and we are deeply 
grateful to all these institutions and individuals. 
The Centre for Science and Environment (CSE) 
was more than generous with their photographs 
and Amit Shankar and Anil with their time. 
Outlook Magazine also shared with us, at very 
short notice, photos from their archives. Sheeba 
Chacchi provided us with her photos for the 
photo-essay on the women’s movement. Salil 
Chaturvedi and Shahid Datawala helped provide 
appropriate images from their collection. Mahesh 
Basadia provided us with photos of the Tawa 
Matsya Sangh (TMS) and the Mahila Balvikas 
Department at Dewas gave us the image of the 
Anganwadi. Harsh Man Rai and Baji Rao Pawar 
also contributed their photos as well as helped 
click new photos that we needed. M.V. Srinivasan 
helped with coordinating the photos from Erode. 
We thank Navdanya for some of the images used 
for the collage on health. Sarada Balagopalan also 
helped click some of the images used in this book. 
The passion and patience that Orijit Sen 
and Salil Chaturvedi have invested as the main 
illustrator and designer of this book can be seen 
in every page, and we thank them for this.
Eklavya played a crucial role in the translation 
of this book into Hindi and we would, in 
particular, like to thank Rashmi Paliwal for her 
supervision of the process and Tultul Biswas for 
helping facilitate this. 
Several institutions have played a key role 
in not only being understanding about our 
pre-occupation with this book but in actively 
assisting its development in numerous ways. 
The Centre for the Study of Developing Societies 
(CSDS), Eklavya, Nirantar, Centre for Women’s 
Development Studies (CWDS) and Sama have 
been generous in their support.
	
The Council acknowledges the valuable 
inputs for analysing syllabi, textbooks and the 
content proposed to be rationalised for this 
edition by Kavita Jain, PGT, Political Science, 
Ashok Vihar; Maneesha Pandey, Professor, 
Department of Political Science, Hindu College, 
University of Delhi; Shankar Sharan, Associate 
Professor, DESS, NCERT; Vanthangpui Khobung, 
Assistant Professor, RIE, Bhopal, NCERT; and 
Sunita Kathuria, PGT, Political Science, MCL 
Saraswati Bal Mandir, Hari Nagar, New Delhi.
2024-25
Introductory note for teachers
There is a substantial difference between 
Civics and Social and Political Life, not only 
in terms of the topics covered but also in the 
pedagogic approaches required in each subject 
area. Keeping these in mind, this Introduction 
attempts to clarify certain aspects of Social and 
Political Life.  
What is Social and Political Life?
Social and Political Life (SPL) is a new subject 
area in middle school social science that has 
replaced the earlier subject of Civics. The National 
Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005 strongly 
argues that Civics should be discontinued 
and its focus on government institutions and 
functioning should be tempered in the new 
subject that replaces it. SPL, as its name 
suggests, focuses on topics related to social, 
political and economic life in contemporary 
India. 
What pedagogical 
approach does SPL use? 
SPL’s use of ‘real-life’ situations is a marked 
departure from Civics. SPL uses these real 
situations to teach concepts because it recognises 
that children learn best through concrete 
experiences. It uses material that draws upon 
the experiential understanding of familial and 
social issues that middle school children bring to 
the classroom. SPL further develops the learner’s 
abilities to critically understand and analyse 
these issues in keeping with the tenets of the 
Indian Constitution. 
This pedagogical approach tends to avoid the 
use of definitions to sum up a concept. Instead, 
it uses case studies and narratives to explain 
concepts. The concepts embedded within the 
narratives are made clear through the in-text 
and end-text questions. The aim is to have the 
learner understand the concept through their 
own experiences and write about it in their own 
words. 
This often means that there is seldom one 
‘correct’ answer to the questions posed. However 
there is a wrong answer. Teachers should try 
to gauge whether an answer to a question 
adequately reflects the learner’s understanding 
of the concept being discussed. 
Given that children learn best through 
understanding and applying concepts 
to local realities, can a ‘national’ 
textbook adequately reflect the many 
‘locals’ that make up the nation? 
SPL functions by the pedagogic principle that 
children learn best through an experiential 
understanding of concepts. This poses a 
contradiction when the effort is to write a ‘national’ 
textbook, because a national text can neither 
sufficiently represent all the various aspects 
of the various locals, nor fix the sociocultural 
background of the child for whom the book 
is intended. Therefore, the case studies and 
narratives used in SPL are a mix of rural and 
urban examples in which the assumed learner 
is not easily discernible. 
Case studies and narratives used in SPL 
are a mix of rural and urban examples.
2024-25
xii
In addition to the important job of 
transacting the text, what crucial role 
does SPL expect teachers to play in 
the classroom?
SPL counts on the teacher to play a very 
significant role in the classroom for the following 
reasons. First, the SPL text specifically names 
communities (for example: Dalit, Muslim, 
poor etc.) in its discussion of various issues 
and this may lead to some discomfort in a 
classroom that has a student population from 
different sociocultural and (perhaps) economic 
backgrounds. We expect the teacher to play a 
crucial role in transacting this material with a 
sensitivity and firm commitment to respecting the 
dignity of all students in the classroom and the 
school. Second, given the limited ability of this 
‘national’ text to engage the local we also envision 
the teacher playing a major role in adding local 
examples to the discussion of concepts, provided 
these remain true to the logic and understanding 
of each concept as intended by the book’s authors.
How does the SPL help the learner 
assimilate the values enshrined in the 
Constitution?
At first glance it might appear to some that unlike 
Civics, SPL’s focus on ‘real’ examples contradicts 
the tenets of the Constitution. Such a focus, 
however, is a technique utilised in SPL in response 
to a critique of Civics textbooks that always only 
discussed the ideal and seldom deliberated upon 
the reality that was very different. Since the 
learner is already aware of such realities, to avoid 
discussing them would make the learning of social 
and political concepts didactic and disconnected. 
Instead, SPL uses this embedded awareness to 
make the learner understand and accept not only 
the legitimacy but also the urgency of the values 
enshrined in the Constitution. Additionally, this 
approach allows the learner to understand the 
role of people’s struggles in the realisation of 
these values.
What are the issues included in the 
Class VII textbook?
The theme for the Class VII grade book is 
the crucial role that equality plays in Indian 
democracy. This theme also serves as one of the 
Units in addition to which the book has four 
more Units. These include Health and State 
Government; Gender; Media; and Markets. 
Units 2, 3 and 5 consist of two consecutive 
chapters, except in the case of the first Unit.
What elements does the Class VII book 
utilise to explain selected issues?
	Storyboards: One component of the feedback 
regarding Class VI book (Social and Political Life-I) 
was that teachers needed more assistance in 
understanding where fictional narratives began 
and ended and in identifying the central concepts 
within these. With this in mind, this year’s book 
introduces storyboards to clearly indicate which 
segments have been fictionalised, and to draw 
The SPL text specifically names 
communities, for example, Dalit, Muslim, 
poor, etc. SPL counts on the teacher 
to transact the material with a firm 
committment to respecting the dignity 
of all students.
The house looks like it
 was hit by a hurricane!
Did you expect it to remain in exactly 
the same condition in which you left 
it this morning, dear?
2024-25
xiii
the learner into the narrative through the use of 
visuals that are often more expressive than lines 
of text.  Specific concepts raised through the 
storyboards are analysed in the accompanying 
text.
	Unit Pages:  Each Unit begins with a Unit Page 
for teachers to help highlight the main points 
raised in the chapters.
	Note on Evaluation: As with the Class VI 
text, this book does not contain definitions or a 
synthesis of concepts. While we recognise that 
this makes it difficult for teachers to evaluate 
what the child has learnt, our attempt is also to 
try and shift some of the understanding amongst 
teachers on what children are expected to learn 
and how such learning should be evaluated. 
This book contains a short note on evaluation 
procedures that we hope will assist teachers in 
their efforts to move students away from rote 
learning.
	Glossary:  The inclusion of a Glossary with 
each chapter is intended to offer the learner 
greater clarity on the language used in the 
text. The words of the Glossary are NOT limited 
to concepts, and it should not be viewed as 
something to be memorised with the expectation 
that such rote learning will contribute to 
conceptual understanding.
	In-text and End-text Questions: As with the 
Class VI text, this year’s book  includes in-text and 
end-text questions, making use of visual material 
and experiential analysis. In-text questions found 
within the text can be used to assess the extent 
to which content has been assimilated.  End-text 
questions usually cover the main concepts raised 
by the chapter and ask learners to explain these 
in their own words.
2024-25
xiv
Teacher’s note on evaluation
Rethinking the ways in which we evaluate learning is a difficult task but one that 
this new subject area requires. Over the years our evaluation system has for the 
most part rewarded students who learnt by rote. This involuntarily encouraged 
many teachers to mark or underline the answers in the text and in this way a 
vicious cycle in which each reinforced the other, was produced. It is this system 
that needs to be changed to relieve both the teacher and the student. Teachers will 
play a significant role in changing evaluation and this note is an effort in 
this direction.
Ability to reason
These questions aim to gauge the extent to which the learner has understood the concepts 
included in the chapter and is able to articulate its main ideas in their own words as well as 
apply these to different contexts. Examples of this include:
What do you understand by the 
term, “all persons are equal before 
the law”? Why do you think it is 
important in a democracy?
Why should the decisions taken 
by the Chief Minister and other 
ministers be debated in the 
Legislative Assembly?
Can you list two ways in which 
you feel that advertising affects 
issues of equality in a democracy?
How do you think your 
neighbourhood shop gets its 
goods? Find out and explain with 
some examples.
On questions
Teachers need to begin by insisting that evaluation be based on ‘new’ questions. These will be similar 
to the ones used in the text, but not the same. Students will be expected to answer these questions in 
their own words. The confidence to do this needs to be built in the students and language corrections 
should, therefore, be tactful and gentle.
Teachers will also need to design a variety of questions that cover a range of skills. Questions that 
demand recalling information by rote should be minimal. Instead, there needs to be different kinds of 
questions based on the main conceptual ideas of each chapter. Some may be designed to draw upon 
the learner’s ability to reason; to compare and contrast experiences; and to infer and extrapolate 
from situations provided. 
The following are some examples taken from this text to explain the above:
2024-25
xv
Facility	
Cost of services	
Availability of service
Private		
Public
Compare and contrast experiences
These questions require the learner to draw upon the main ideas in the text by comparing and 
contrasting concrete situations. These questions often involve the child’s own experiences. 
Examples of this include:
What is the difference between the 
work that MLAs do in the Assembly 
and the work done by government 
departments?
In what ways do the experiences 
of Samoan children and teenagers 
differ from your own experiences 
of growing up? Is there anything 
described in this experience that you 
wish were part of your growing up?
Compare the earnings per shirt of 
the worker in the garment factory, 
the garment exporter and the 
shop-owner in the US. What do 
you find? 
Infer and extrapolate from situations
This type of question is important to SPL because of the extensive use of narratives to explain 
concepts as well as the constant reference to the learner’s own experiences. It is these questions 
that link the narrative to the underlying concept. The learner’s ability to understand the narrative 
as well as its explication of the concept can be gauged through these questions. 
In India it is often said that we are 
unable to provide health services 
for all because the government 
does not have enough money and 
facilities. After reading the left 
hand column above do you think 
that this is true? Discuss.
What does this ad want me to 
feel when I use this brand?
What differences do you find between 
private and public health services in your 
area? Use the following table to write 
about these.
Were Harmeet and Shonali correct 
in saying that Harmeet’s mother 
did not work?
2024-25
xvi
Look at the photograph and think about 
the boy who is being carried down the 
stairs. Do you think the above law is being 
implemented in his case? What needs to be 
done to make the building more accessible 
for him? How would his being carried down 
the stairs affect his dignity as well as his 
safety?
Interpreting visual material
Similarly students should have an opportunity to read and interpret visual material. Hence 
there should be questions based on pictures, tables, flowcharts, etc.
Can you give this diagram a title? What do 
you understand about the link between 
media and big business from this diagram?
The shirt below shows the profit made 
by the businessperson, and the various 
costs that he had to pay. Find out from 
the diagram below, what the cost price 
includes.
Purchase
` 300
Storage
` 200
Advertising 
 ` 400
Profit
` 900
1
2
3
BIG BUSINESS HOUSES 
READERS, 
VIEWERS, 
LISTENERS 
advertise 
their 
products
MEDIA
promotes 
products through 
advertisements
People buy 
products 
seen in the 
media. Money, 
therefore, 
flows back to 
big business 
houses
Some own 
radio, TV, 
newspaper 
2024-25
xvii
On answers
Since the learner is being asked to write in their own words teachers will need to stop expecting ‘exact’ 
responses. Instead, the learner should be encouraged to state in their own words their understanding 
of the material and concepts they’ve read. Their comprehension, ability to soundly reason and 
communicate their ideas is what needs to be evaluated. 
It would also be fair to expect a range of correct answers when the learner is asked to think through 
a particular narrative situation and apply the underlying concept. It is crucial that teachers discuss 
a common evaluation scheme that helps them distinguish between the range of correct answers as 
well as more crucially identify wrong answers. 
Other forms of evaluation
We need to demystify the stress on examinations as the best tool for evaluating the learner. Rather 
than wait for alternate evaluation structures to trickle down from the higher grades, we need to use 
the learner’s years in middle school to experiment with other ways of evaluation. For this purpose we 
need to use different methods, some of which are briefly discussed below – 
	Open-book exercises: As the name implies ‘open-book’ is a process in which the learner is allowed 
to refer to the textbook while answering a question. Open book exercises offer children an opportunity 
to pick out answers without feeling the burden of “remembering the details”. The learner would be 
asked to read portions of the text again with the question in mind. New questions are essential for this 
exercise. Questions based on the learner’s ability to infer, extrapolate and apply concepts are ideal 
for open-book exercises. Answering the question in the learner’s own words should be emphasised. 
	Oral reasoning and comprehension: Children express so much through speaking and sharing in 
a classroom. Yet, most often, our current educational system tends to regard this as ‘useless talk’. 
Learning from peers and expressing themselves through the spoken word is something that needs to 
be encouraged. Oral evaluation exercises provide an avenue through which to value this. A number 
of in-text questions in this book can be answered orally and the teacher should begin this process in 
the classroom.
	Collective project work: Collective project work is another way to evaluate students. Preparing 
a wall-paper is one such example used in the text. The expectations from these projects should be 
reasonable and limited to what learners can do on their own. Project work should be done in the 
classroom and not as homework. Many end-text questions in this book can be converted into small 
projects. 
These forms of evaluation help emphasise that learning is continuous and happens in multiple 
ways. Evaluation should be designed to enable and encourage this learning and not be reduced to a 
filtering mechanism. 
2024-25
2024-25
Growing up as
Boys and Girls
Being a boy or a girl is an
important part of one·s identity. The
society we grow up in teaches us
what kind of behaviour is
acceptable for girls and boys, what
boys and girls can or cannot do.
We often grow up thinking that
these things are exactly the same
everywhere. But do all societies
look at boys and girls in the same
way? We will try and answer this
question in this chapter. We will
also look at how the different roles
assigned to boys and girls prepare
them for their future roles as men
and women. We will learn that
most societies value men and
women differently. The roles
women play and the work they do
are usually valued less than the
roles men play and the work they
do. This chapter will also examine
how inequalities between men and
women emerge in the area of work.
4
CHAPTER
In what ways do the experiences
of Samoan children and teenagers
differ from your own experiences
of growing up? Is there anything
in this experience that you wish
was part of your growing up?
A Class VII Samoan child
in his school uniform.
Why do girls like to go to school
together in groups?
Growing up in Samoa in the 1920s
The Samoan Islands are part of a large group of small
islands in the southern part of the Pacific Ocean. In
the 1920s, according to research reports on Samoan
society, children did not go to school. They learnt
many things, such as how to take care of children or
do household work from older children and from
adults. Fishing was a very important activity on the
islands. Young people, therefore, learnt to undertake
long fishing expeditions. But they learnt these things
at different points in their childhood.
As soon as babies could walk, their mothers or
other adults no longer looked after them. Older
children, often as young as five years old, took over
this responsibility. Both boys and girls looked after
their younger siblings. But, by the time a boy was
about nine years old, he joined the older boys in
learning outdoor jobs like fishing and planting
coconuts. Girls had to continue looking after small
children or do errands for adults till they were
teenagers. But, once they became teenagers they had
much more freedom. After the age of fourteen or so,
girls also went on fishing trips, worked in the
plantations, learnt how to weave baskets. Cooking
was done in special cooking-houses, where boys were
supposed to do most of the work while girls helped
with the preparations.
Growing up male in
Madhya Pradesh in the 1960s
The following is adapted from an account of
experiences of being in a small town in Madhya
Pradesh in the 1960s.
From Class VI onwards, boys and girls went to
separate schools. The girls· school was designed very
differently from the boys· school. They had a central
courtyard where they played in total seclusion and
39
Chapter 4: Growing up as Boys and Girls
40
Social and Political Life
Make a drawing of a street or a
park in your neighbourhood. Show
the different kinds of activities
young boys and girls may be
engaged in. You could do this
individually or in groups.
Are there as many girls as boys in
your drawing? Most probably you
would have drawn fewer girls. Can
you think of reasons why there
are fewer women and girls in your
neighbourhood streets, parks and
markets in the late evenings or at
night?
Are girls and boys doing different
activities? Can you think of
reasons why this might be so?
What would happen if you
replaced the girls with the boys
and vice-versa?
safety from the outside world. The boys· school had
no such courtyard and our playground was just a
big space attached to the school. Every evening, once
school was over, the boys watched as hundreds of
school girls crowded the narrow streets. As these
girls walked on the streets, they looked so purposeful.
This was unlike the boys who used the streets as a
place to stand around idling, to play, to try out tricks
with their bicycles. For the girls, the street was simply
a place to get straight home. The girls always went
in groups, perhaps because they also carried fears
of being teased or attacked.
After reading the two examples above, we realise
that there are many different ways of growing up.
Often we think that there is only one way in which
children grow up. This is because we are most
familiar with our own experiences. If we talk to elders
in our family, we will see that their childhoods were
probably very different from ours.
We also realise that societies make clear
distinctions between boys and girls. This begins from
a very young age. We are for example, given different
toys to play with. Boys are usually given cars to play
with and girls dolls. Both toys can be a lot of fun to
play with. Why are girls then given dolls and boys
cars? Toys become a way of telling children that they
will have different futures when they become men
and women. If we think about it, this difference is
created in the smallest and most everyday things.
How girls must dress, what games boys should play,
how girls need to talk softly or boys need to be tough.
All these are ways of telling children that they have
specific roles to play when they grow up to be men
and women. Later in life this affects the subjects we
can study or the careers we can choose.
In most societies, including our own, the roles men
and women play or the work they do, are not valued
equally. Men and women do not have the same
status. Let us look at how this difference exists in
the work done by men and women.
40
Social and Political Life
41
Ma, we are going on a
school excursion. Rosie Ma·am
needs volunteers. Can·t you
take a holiday from office
and volunteer?
¶MY MOTHER
DOES NOT WORK·
Harmeet·s mother
always comes for
excursions, beause
she doesn·t work.
Shonali, how can
you say that! You
know that Jaspreet
aunty is up at 5 a.m.
everyday doing all
the housework!
Yes, but that·s not real
work, it·s just house work!
Oh! That·s what you
think, do you? Let·s go over
to their house and ask
Jaspreet what she thinks!
Harsharan, Shonali
thinks that your wife
is not a working
person!
But isn·t that correct aunty?
My mother is a housewife ²
she does not work!
Then Jaspreet, why don·t
you just relax and let them
manage everything for a
change?
Great idea!
OK, I·ll go on strike
tomorrow!
What fun! We·ll take care
of everything tomorrow
² with Papa!
Oh God! Look at the time!
Where·s my breakfast? Why aren·t
the children ready?
Ha, ha!
How would I know?
I·m on strike, remember?
Besides, Mangala has also
taken leave today.
Oh-ho! That·s
the school bus! I·ll
have to drop
them in the car.
Hurry, hurry! And
ask Harmeet to switch
on the pump!
At the Singh·s house
Next morning, 7:30 a.m.
HONK
HONK
42
Social and Political Life
But, what about the kids· lunch boxes?
Oh no! Forgot
about that!
I·ll give you some money. Just
buy something from the
canteen today...
Ma already gave us
money for that!
Evening, 6.00 p.m.
I·m exhausted! How about
some tea? Oh, I forgot...your
strike...I·ll make some myself.
The house looks like it
was hit by a hurricane!
Did you expect it to remain in exactly the
same condition in which you left it this
morning, dear?
Harmeet, where
on earth are the
tea leaves?
Hee hee...
I wonder if they
still believe I don·t
work?...and now I have
to remind them that
Chachaji and Chachiji
are coming
for dinner.
DING
DING
Valuing housework
Harmeet·s family did not think that the work Jaspreet
did within the house was real work. This feeling is
not unique to their families. Across the world, the
main responsibility for housework and care-giving
tasks, like looking after the family, especially
children, the elderly and sick members, lies with
women. Yet, as we have seen, the work that women
do within the home is not recognised as work. It is
also assumed that this is something that comes
naturally to women. It, therefore, does not have to
be paid for. And society devalues this work.
43
Melani with her daughter.
Were Harmeet and Shonali correct
in saying that Harmeet·s mother
did not work?
What do you think would happen
if your mother or those involved
in doing the work at home went
on a strike for a day?
Why do you think that men and
boys generally do not do
housework? Do you think they
should?
Lives of domestic workers
In the story above, Harmeet·s mother was not the
only one who did the housework. A lot of the work
was done by Mangala, their domestic helper.
Many homes, particularly in towns and cities,
employ domestic workers. They do a lot of work ²
sweeping and cleaning, washing clothes and
dishes, cooking, looking after young children or
the elderly. Most domestic workers are women.
Sometimes, even young boys or girls are employed
to do this work. Wages are low, as domestic work
does not have much value. A domestic worker·s
day can begin as early as five in the morning and
end as late as twelve at night! Despite the hard
work they do, their employers often do not show
them much respect. This is what Melani, a
domestic worker had to say about her experience
of working in Delhi ² ´My first job was with a rich
family that lived in a three-storeyed house. The
memsahib was very strange as she would shout
to get any work done. My work was in the kitchen.
There were two other girls who did the cleaning.
Our day would begin at 5 o·clock. For breakfast
we would get a cup of tea and two dry rotis. We
could never get a third roti. In the evening, when
I cooked the food, the two other girls would beg
me to give them an extra roti. I would secretly
give it to them and make an extra one for myself.
We were so hungry after working through the day!
We could not wear chappals in the house. In the
winter, our feet would swell up with the cold. I
used to feel scared of the memsahib but also felt
angry and humiliated. Did we not work all day?
Did we not deserve to be treated with some
respect?µ
In fact, what we commonly term as housework
actually involves many different tasks. A number
of these tasks require heavy physical work. In
both rural and urban areas women and girls have
to fetch water. In rural areas women and girls
carry heavy headloads of firewood. Tasks like
Chapter 4: Growing up as Boys and Girls
44
Social and Political Life
State
Women Paid
Women Unpaid
Women
Men Paid
Men Unpaid
Men
(Work hours
(Housework
(Total)
(Work hours
(Housework
(Total)
per week)
hours per week)
per week)
hours per week)
Haryana
23
30
?
38
2
?
Tamil Nadu
19
35
?
40
4
?
Many women like ShonaliĬs mother in
the story and the women in Tamil Nadu
and Haryana who were surveyed work
both inside and outside the home. This is
often referred to as the double burden of
womenĬs work.
washing clothes, cleaning, sweeping and picking up
loads require bending, lifting and carrying. Many
chores, like cooking, involve standing for long hours
in front of hot stoves. The work women do is
strenuous and physically demanding ³ words that
we normally associate with men.
Another aspect of housework and care-giving that
we do not recognise is that it is very time consuming.
In fact, if we add up the housework and the work,
women do outside the home, we find that women
spend much more time working than men and have
much less time for leisure.
Below is some data from a special study done
by the Central Statistical Organization of India
(1998²1999). See if you can fill in the blanks.
Women·s work and equality
As we have seen the low value attached to women·s
household and care-giving work is not an individual
or family matter. It is part of a larger system of
inequality between men and women. It, therefore,
has to be dealt with through actions not just at the
level of the individual or the family but also by the
government. As we now know, equality is an
important principle of our Constitution. The
Constitution says that being male or female should
not become a reason for discrimination. In reality,
inequality between the sexes exists. The government
is, therefore, committed to understanding the reasons
for this and taking positive steps to remedy the
situation. For example, it recognises that burden of
child-care and housework falls on women and girls.
What are the total number of work
hours spent by women in Haryana
and Tamil Nadu each week?
How does this compare with the
total number of work hours spent
by men?
45
Children at an Anganwadi centre in a
village in Madhya Pradesh.
This naturally has an impact on whether
girls can attend school. It determines
whether women can work outside the
house and what kind of jobs and careers
they can have. The government has set up
anganwadis or child-care centres in several
villages in the country. The government
has passed laws that make it mandatory
for organisations that have more than 30
women employees to provide crèche
facilities. The provision of crèches helps
many women to take up employment
outside the home. It also makes it possible
for more girls to attend schools.
Chapter 4: Growing up as Boys and Girls
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
www.in.undp.org
46
Social and Political Life
This poster was created by a womenĬs group in
Bengal. Can you write an interesting slogan for
the poster?
What do you think this poster is trying to say?
47
EXERCISES
1.
Are the statements given alongside true or false? Support
your answer with the use of an example ²
2.
Housework is invisible and unpaid work.
Housework is physically demanding.
Housework is time consuming.
Write in your own words what is meant by the terms
¶invisible·, ¶physically demanding·, and ¶time consuming·?
Give one example of each based on the household tasks
undertaken by women in your home.
3.
Make a list of toys and games that boys typically play and
another for girls. If there is a difference between the two
lists, can you think of some reasons why this is so? Does
this have any relationship to the roles children have to
play as adults?
4.
If you have someone working as a domestic help in your
house or locality talk to her and find out a little bit more
about her life ² Who are her family members?  Where is
her home?  How many hours does she work?  How much
does she get paid?  Write a small story based on these
details.
a. All societies do not think
similarly about the roles that boys
and girls play.
b. Our society does not make
distinctions between boys and
girls when they are growing up.
c. Women who stay at home do
not work.
d. The work that women do is less
valued than that of men.
Glossary
Identity: Identity is a sense of self-awareness of who one is. Typically, a person can have several
identities. For example, a person can be a girl, a sister and a musician.
Double-burden: Literally means a double load. This term is commonly used to describe the women·s
work situation. It has emerged from a recognition that women typically labour both inside the
home (housework) and outside.
Care-giving: Care-giving refers to a range of tasks related to looking after and nurturing. Besides
physical tasks, they also involve a strong emotional aspect.
De-valued: When someone is not given due recognition for a task or job they have done, they can
feel de-valued. For example, if a boy has put in a lot of effort into making a special birthday gift for
his friend and this friend does not say anything about this, then the boy may feel de-valued.
Chapter 4: Growing up as Boys and Girls
48
Social and Political Life
Women Change
the World
In the previous chapter, we saw how women·s
work in the home is not recognised as work. We
also read how doing household work and taking
care of family members is a full time job and
there are no specific hours at which it begins or
ends. In this chapter, we will look at work
outside the home, and understand how some
occupations are seen to be more suitable for men
than for women. We will also learn about how
women struggle for equality. Getting an education
was, and still is, one way in which new
opportunities were created for women. This
chapter will also briefly trace the different types
of efforts made by the women·s movement to
challenge discrimination in more recent
years.
5
CHAPTER
49
A farmer
A factory worker
A nurse
A scientist
A pilot
A teacher
Are there more images of men
than women?
In what kinds of jobs were there
more images of men than women?
Have all the nurses been drawn as
females? Why?
Are there fewer images of female
farmers? If so, why?
Category
Male image
Female image
Teacher
Farmer
Factory worker
Nurse
Scientist
Pilot
Who does what work?
Draw images of the following ²
See what images your class drew by filling in the
table below. Add up the number of male and female
images separately for each occupation.
49
Chapter 5: Women Change the World
50
Social and Political Life
83.6 per cent of working women in India
are engaged in agricultural work. Their
work includes planting, weeding,
harvesting and threshing. Yet, when we
think of a farmer we only think of a
man.
Source: NSS 61st Round (2004ĩ05)
Category
Male image
Female image
Teacher
5
25
Farmer
30
0
Factory worker
 25
5
Nurse
0
30
Scientist
25
5
Pilot
27
3
How does your class exercise
compare with Rosie Ma·am·s
class exercise?
Rosie Ma·am·s class has 30 children. She did the
same exercise in her class and here is the result.
51
Breaking stereotypes
Engine drivers are men. But 27-year-old Laxmi Lakra, from a
poor tribal family in Jharkhand has begun to change things.
She is the first woman engine driver for Northern Railways.
Laxmi·s parents are not literate but they struggled and
overcame many hardships to make sure their children got an
education. Laxmi studied in a government school. Even in school,
Laxmi helped with the housework and did odd jobs. She studied
hard and did well and then went on to get a diploma in
electronics. She then took the railway board exam and passed
it on her first attempt.
Laxmi says, ´I love challenges and the moment somebody says it
is not for girls, I make sure I go ahead and do it.µ  Laxmi has had
to do this several times in her life ² when she wanted to take electronics; when she rode
motorcycles at the polytechnic; and when she decided to become an engine driver.
Her philosophy is simple ² ´As long as I am having fun without harming anyone, as long as I am
doing well and helping my parents,  why should I not lead a lifestyle of my choice?µ
(Adapted from Driving Her Train by Neeta Lal, Women·s Features Service)
Fewer opportunities and rigid expectations
A lot of the children in Rosie Ma·am·s class drew
women as nurses and men as army officers. The
reason they did this is because they feel that outside
the home too, women are good at only certain jobs.
For example, many people believe that women make
better nurses because they are more patient and
gentle. This is linked to women·s roles within the
family. Similarly, it is believed that science requires
a technical mind and girls and women are not capable
of dealing with technical things.
Because so many people believe in these
stereotypes, many girls do not get the same support
that boys do to study and train to become doctors
and engineers. In most families, once girls finish
school, they are encouraged by their families to see
marriage as their main aim in life.
Chapter 5: Women Change the World
52
Social and Political Life
Read the story below and answer
the questions ²
If you were Xavier, what subject
would you choose and why?
In your experience, what are some
of the other pressures that boys
experience?
Xavier was happy with the results of his Class X
board exams. Though his marks in Science and
Maths were not high, he had done well in his
favourite subjects ² History and Languages.  When
his parents saw his report card, however, they did
not look pleased at all...
My Goodness! Xavier,  you have
managed only 65% in Maths. Your marks
in Physics are low too...
I know Mama, but it·s
okay, because I don·t
want to take Maths or
Science. I want to
study History.
   Why do you want to take History?
Think about your future.
You have to get a good job!
    History will not help. It has no scope!
But, but, I don·t like
Maths or Science!
Be sensible, son. Take Maths, and you can
study computers side by side. The job market
for computers is very good.
It is important to understand that we live in a
society in which all children face pressures from the
world around them. Sometimes, these come in the
form of demands from adults. At other times, they
can just be because of unfair teasing by our own
friends. Boys are pressurised to think about getting
a job that will pay a good salary. They are also teased
and bullied if they do not behave like other boys.
You may remember that in your Class VI book you
read about how boys at an early age are encouraged
not to cry in front of others.
53
Ramabai (1858ĩ1922), shown above
with her daughter, championed the cause
of womenĬs education. She never went to
school but learnt to read and write from
her parents. She was given the title
īPanditaĬ because she could read and
write Sanskrit, a remarkable
achievement as women then were not
allowed such knowledge. She went on to
set up a Mission in Khedgaon near Pune
in 1898, where widows and poor women
were encouraged not only to become
literate but to be independent. They were
taught a variety of skills from carpentry
to running a printing press, skills that
are not usually taught to girls even today.
The printing press can be seen in the
picture on the top left corner. RamabaiĬs
Mission is still active today.
Learning for change
Going to school is an extremely important part of
your life. As more and more children enter school
every year, we begin to think that it is normal for all
children to go to school. Today, it is difficult for us
to imagine that school and learning could be seen
as ´out of boundsµ or not appropriate for some
children. But in the past, the skill of reading and
writing was known to only a few. Most children learnt
the work their families or elders did. For girls, the
situation was worse. In communities that taught sons
to read and write, daughters were not allowed to learn
the alphabet. Even in families where skills like
pottery, weaving and craft were taught, the
contribution of daughters and women was only seen
as supportive. For example, in the pottery trade,
women collected the mud and prepared the earth
for the pots. But since they did not operate the wheel,
they were not seen as potters.
In the nineteenth century, many new ideas about
education and learning emerged. Schools became
more common and communities that had never
learnt reading and writing started sending their
children to school. But there was a lot of opposition
to educating girls even then. Yet many women and
men made efforts to open schools for girls. Women
struggled to learn to read and write.
Chapter 5: Women Change the World
54
Social and Political Life
Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain and her dreams about ¶Ladyland·
Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain (1880 ²1932) was born into a rich family who owned a lot of land.  Though
she knew how to read and write Urdu, she was stopped from learning Bangla and English. In those
days, English was seen as a language that would expose girls to new ideas, which people thought were
not correct for them. Therefore, it was mostly boys who were taught English. Rokeya learnt
to read and write Bangla and English with the support of her elder brother and an elder
sister.  She went on to become a writer. She wrote a remarkable story titled
Sultana·s Dream in 1905 to practise her English skills when she was merely 25
years old. This story imagined a woman called Sultana who reaches a place
called Ladyland. Ladyland is a place where women had the freedom to study,
work, and create inventions like controlling rain from the clouds and
flying air cars. In this Ladyland, the men had been sent into seclusion ²
their aggressive guns and other weapons of war defeated by the brain-
power of women. As Sultana travels in Ladyland with Sister Sarah,
she awakes to realise that she was only dreaming.
As you can see, Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain was dreaming of
women flying planes and cars even before girls were being
allowed to go to school! This was the way in which education
and learning had changed Rokeya·s own life.  Rokeya did not
stop at getting education just for herself. Her education gave
her the power not only to dream and write, but also to do
more ² to help other girls go to school and to build their
own dreams.  In 1910, she started a school for girls in Kolkata,
and to this day, the school is still functioning.
Learning to read and write led some
women to question the situation of
women in society. They wrote stories,
letters and autobiographies describing
their own experiences of inequality. In
their writings, they also imagined new
ways of thinking and living for both
men and women.
Let us read about the experience of Rashsundari
Devi (1800²1890), who was born in West Bengal,
some 200 years ago. At the age of 60, she wrote her
autobiography in Bangla. Her book titled Amar Jiban
is the first known autobiography written by an Indian
woman. Rashsundari Devi was a housewife from a
rich landlord·s family. At that time, it was believed
that if a woman learnt to read and write, she would
bring bad luck to her husband and become a widow!
Despite this, she taught herself how to read and write
in secret, well after her marriage.
´I would start working at dawn, and I would still
be at it until well beyond midnight. I had no rest in
between. I was only fourteen years old at the time. I
came to nurture a great longing: I would learn to
read and I would read a religious manuscript. I was
55
Unlike Rashsundari Devi and Rokeya
Hossain, who were not allowed to learn
to read and write, large numbers of girls
attend school in India today. Despite this,
there continue to be many girls who leave
school for reasons of poverty, inadequate
schooling facilities and discrimination.
Providing equal schooling facilities to
children from all communities and class
backgrounds, and particularly girls,
continues to be a challenge in India.
unlucky, in those days women were not educated.
Later, I began to resent my own thoughts. What is
wrong with me? Women do not read, how will I do
it? Then I had a dream: I was reading the manuscript
of Chaitanya Bhagabat (the life of a saint)« Later in
the day, as I sat cooking in the kitchen, I heard my
husband say to my eldest son: ´Bepin, I have left my
Chaitanya Bhagabat here. When I ask for it, bring it
in.µ He left the book there and went away. When the
book had been taken inside, I secretly took out a
page and hid it carefully. It was a job hiding it, for
nobody must find it in my hands. My eldest son was
practising his alphabets at that time. I hid one of
them as well. At times, I went over that, trying to
match letters from that page with the letters that I
remembered. I also tried to match the words with
those that I would hear in the course of my days.
With tremendous care and effort, and over a long
period of time, I learnt how to read«µ
After learning the alphabet, Rashsundari Devi was
able to read the Chaitanya Bhagabat. Through her
own writing she also gave the world an opportunity
to read about women·s lives in those days.
Rashsundari Devi wrote about her everyday life
experiences in details. There were days when she
did not have a moment·s rest, no time even to sit
down and eat!
Schooling and education today
Today, both boys and girls attend school in large
numbers. Yet, as we will see, there still remain
differences between the education of boys and girls.
India has a census every 10 years, which counts the
whole population of the country. It also gathers
detailed information about the people living in
India ² their age, schooling, what work they do, and
so on. We use this information to measure many
things, like the number of literate people, and the
ratio of men and women. According to the 1961
census, about 40 per cent of all boys and men
Chapter 5: Women Change the World
55
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
www.in.undp.org
56
Social and Political Life
Level
All
        SC
        ST
Boys
Girls
Total
Boys
Girls
Total
Boys
Girls
Total
Primary (Classes 1-5)
4.36
3.88
4.13
4.71
4.20
4.46
7.02
6.84
6.93
Upper Primary (Classes 6-8)
3.49
4.60
4.03
5.00
6.03
5.51
8.48
8.71
8.59
Secondary (Classes 9-10)
17.21
16.88
17.06
19.64
19.05
19.36
24.94 24.40
24.68
Source: Educational Statistics at a Glance, MHRD, 2018
What percentage of children leave
school at the upper primary level?
At which level of education do you
see the highest percentage of
children leaving?
Why do you think that the
percentage of Adivasi girls and
boys leaving school is higher than
that of any other group?
(7 years old and above) were literate (that is, they
could at least write their names) compared to just
15 per cent of all girls and women. In the most recent
census of 2011, these figures have grown to 82 per
cent for boys and men, and 65 per cent for girls and
women. This means that the proportion of both men
and women who are now able to read and have at
least some amount of schooling has increased. But,
as you can also see, the percentage of the male
group is still higher than the female group. The gap
has not gone away.
Here is a table that shows the percentage of girls
and boys who leave schools from different social
groups including Scheduled Caste (SC) and
Scheduled Tribe (ST).
(in percentage)
You have probably noticed in the above table that
SC and ST girls leave school at a rate that is higher
than the category ¶All Girls·. This means that girls
who are from Dalit (SC) and Adivasi (ST) backgrounds
are less likely to remain in school. The 2011 census
also found that Muslim girls are less likely, than SC
and ST girls, to complete primary school. While a
Muslim girl is likely to stay in school for around
three years, girls from other communities spend
around four years in school.
There are several reasons why children from Dalit,
Adivasi and Muslim communities leave school. In
many parts of the country, especially in rural and
poor areas, there may not even be proper schools
nor teachers who teach on a regular basis. If a school
Average Annual Drop-out Rate in School Education (2014²15)
57
From the given table, convert the
figures of primary class children
who leave school into a bar
diagram. Two percentages have
already been converted for you in
the bar diagram on the left.
is not close to people·s homes, and there is no
transport like buses or vans, parents may not be
willing to send their girls to school. Many families
are too poor and unable to bear the cost of educating
all their children. Boys may get preference in this
situation. Many children also leave school because
they are discriminated against by their teacher and
classmates.
Women·s movement
Women and girls now have the right to study and go
to school. There are other spheres ² like legal reform,
violence and health ² where the situation of women
and girls has improved. These changes have not
happened automatically. Women individually, and
collectively have struggled to bring about these
changes. This struggle is known as the Women·s
Movement. Individual women and women·s
organisations from different parts of the country are
part of the movement. Many men support the women·s
movement as well. The diversity, passion and efforts
of those involved makes it a very vibrant movement.
Different strategies have been used to spread
awareness, fight discrimination and seek justice.
Here are some glimpses of this struggle.
Chapter 5: Women Change the World
Find out about the īBeti Bachao Beti PadhaoĬ
campaign launched in 2014.
Boys and girls
Percentage
2
4
6
8
10
0
All
boys
4.36%
ST
boys
7.02%
Campaigning
Campaigns to fight discrimination
and violence against women are an
important part of the women·s
movement. Campaigns have also led
to new laws being passed. A law was
made in 2006 to give women who face
physical and mental violence within
their homes, also called domestic
violence, some legal protection.
Similarly, efforts made by the
women·s movement led the Supreme
Court to formulate guidelines in 1997
to protect women against sexual
harassment at the workplace and
within educational institutions.
In the 1980s, for example, women·s
groups across the country spoke out
against ¶dowry deaths· ³ cases of
young brides being murdered by their
in-laws or husbands, greedy for more
dowry. Women·s groups spoke out
against the failure to bring these
cases to justice. They did so by
coming on to the streets, approaching
the courts, and by sharing
information. Eventually, this became
a public issue in the newspapers and
society, and the dowry laws were
changed to punish families who seek
dowry.
Satyarani, an active member of the womenĬs movement,
sitting on the steps of the Supreme Court surrounded by legal
files gathered during the course of a long legal battle to seek
justice for her daughter who was murdered for dowry.
Raising Awareness
An important part of the women·s
movements· work is to raise public
awareness on women·s rights issues.
Their message has been spread through
street plays, songs and public meetings.
Protesting
The women·s movement raises its voice when violations against women take place or
for example, when a law or policy acts against their interests. Public rallies and
demonstrations are a very powerful way of drawing attention to injustices.
60
Social and Political Life
Showing Solidarity
The women·s movement is also about showing
solidarity with other women and causes.
Above: Women are holding up
candles to demonstrate the
solidarity between the people of
India and Pakistan. Every year, on
14 August, several thousand people
gather at Wagah on the border of
India and Pakistan and hold a
cultural programme.
Below: On 8 March, International WomenĬs Day, women all over
the world come together to celebrate and renew their struggles.
61
1.
How do you think stereotypes, about what women can or
cannot do, affect women·s right to equality?
2.
List one reason why learning the alphabet was so
important to women like Rashsundari Devi, Ramabai and
Rokeya.
3.
´Poor girls drop out of school because they are not interested
in getting an education.µ Re-read the last paragraph on page
62 and explain why this statement is not true.
4.
Can you describe two methods of struggle that the
women·s movement used to raise issues? If you had to
organise a struggle against stereotypes, about what
women can or cannot do, what method would you employ
from the ones that you have read about? Why would you
choose this particular method?
EXERCISES
Glossary
Stereotype: When we believe that people belonging to particular groups based on religion, wealth,
language are bound to have certain fixed characteristics or can only do a certain type of work, we
create a stereotype. For example, in this chapter, we saw how boys and girls are made to take
certain subjects not because he or she has an aptitude for it, but because they are either boys or
girls. Stereotypes prevent us from looking at people as unique individuals.
Discrimination: When we do not treat people equally or with respect we are indulging in
discrimination. It happens when people or organisations act on their prejudices. Discrimination
usually takes place when we treat some one differently or make a distinction.
Violation: When someone forcefully breaks the law or a rule or openly shows disrespect, we can
say that he or she has committed a violation.
Sexual harassment: This refers to physical or verbal behaviour that is of a sexual nature and
against the wishes of a woman.
Chapter 5: Women Change the World
UNIT
FOUR
Media
Teacher·s note
Today, the media and advertising are a
pervasive presence in the lives of young
people, who may or may not have taken
the opportunity to seriously reflect upon
this fact. This Unit offers some ways by
which we can begin to think about these.
The focus is on explaining the strong
links between media and technology and
media and big business.  It explains how
the media ¶sets the agenda· through
influencing our perception of issues
worth devoting time and attention to,
and issues that are neglected or
overridden.
Chapter 6 foregrounds the widespread
effects of the media, and attempts to
connect the issues under discussion to the
learner·s own lives.  At the end of the
chapter, we expect the learner to recognise
the role of big business in the media
coverage of events ³ the way ¶news· is
selected for coverage, and the explicit/
implicit dimensions of that coverage. We
use two fictitious news reports to
demonstrate that there is seldom just one
version of a story or an event.  Building on
this, we expect the learner to develop the
skills required to critically analyse a
newspaper report or a TV story through
scrutinising the information provided, as
well as understanding the logic behind the
exclusion of certain perspectives.
These ideas can be strengthened by
selecting 
examples 
from 
actual
advertisements and structuring similar
questions around them.
This chapter concludes by linking its
contents to the idea of democracy.  It
emphasises, through using examples of
local media as well as social advertising,
how mainstream media and advertising
tend to favour those who have greater
financial as well as social resources. This
point can be reinforced in the classroom
by using local examples of media stories,
as well as posing questions about the ways
in which advertising is changing what is
locally available as well as locally valued.
63
64
Social and Political Life
Understanding Media
What is your favourite TV programme? What do you like listening to on
the radio?  Which newspaper or magazine do you usually read? Do you
surf the internet and what have you found most useful about it? Did you
know that there is one word that is often used to collectively refer to
the radio, TV, newspapers, Internet and several other forms of
communication. This word is ¶media·. In this chapter, you will read
more about the media. You will find out what is required to make it
work, as well as the ways in which the media affects our daily lives. Can
you think of one thing that you have learnt from the media this week?
6
CHAPTER
65
Look at the collage on the left and
list six various kinds of media that
you see.
An artistĬs impression of Gutenberg
printing the first sheet of the Bible.
Ask older members of your family
about what they used to listen to
on the radio when there was no
TV around. Find out from them
when the first TV came to your
area. When was cable TV
introduced?
How many people in your
neighbourhood use the Internet?
List three things that you know
about some other part of the
world from watching television?
Everything ranging from the stall at the local fair to
the programme that you see on TV can be called
media. Media is the plural form of the word ¶medium·
and it describes the various ways through which we
communicate in society. Because media refers to all
means of communication, everything ranging from
a phone call to the evening news on TV can be called
media. TV, radio and newspapers are a form of media
that reaches millions of people, or the masses, across
the country and the world and, thus, they are called
mass media.
Media and technology
It would probably be difficult for you to imagine your
life without the media. But cable television and the
widespread use of the Internet is a recent
phenomenon. These have been around for less than
twenty years. The technology that mass media uses
keeps changing.
Newspapers, television and radio can reach
millions of people because they use certain
technologies. We also tend to discuss newspapers
and magazines as the print media; and TV and radio
as the electronic media. Why do you think
newspapers are called print media? As you read
further, you will find that this naming is related to
the different technologies that these media use. The
following photographs will give you a sense of the
ways in which technology that mass media uses has
changed over the years and continues to change.
Changing technology, or machines, and making
technology more modern, helps media to reach more
people. It also improves the quality of sound and the
images that you see. But technology does more than
this. It also changes the ways in which we think about
our lives. For example, today it is quite difficult for
us to think of our lives without television. Television
has enabled us to think of ourselves as members of
a larger global world. Television images travel huge
65
Chapter 6: Understanding Media
66
Social and Political Life
Can you list three different
products that are advertised
during your favourite TV
programme?
Take a newspaper and count the
number of advertisements in it.
Some people say that newspapers
have too many advertisements. Do
you think this is true and why?
John L. Baird sits in front of the
apparatus with which he demonstrated to
the Royal Institute, his invention, the
ītelevisorĬ, an early television.
With electronic typerwriters, journalism
underwent a sea-change in the 1940s.
distances through satellites and cables. This allows
us to view news and entertainment channels from
other parts of the world. Most of the cartoons that
you see on television are mostly from Japan or the
United States. We can now be sitting in Chennai or
Jammu and can see images of a storm that has hit
the coast of Florida in the United States. Television
has brought the world closer to us.
Media and money
The different technologies that mass media use are
expensive. Just think about the TV studio in which
the newsreader sits ² it has lights, cameras, sound
recorders, transmission satellites, etc., all of which
cost a lot of money.
In a news studio, it is not only the newsreader
who needs to be paid but also a number of other
people who help put the broadcast together. This
includes those who look after the cameras and lights.
Also, as you read earlier the technologies that mass
media use keep changing and so a lot of money is
spent on getting the latest technology. Due to these
costs, the mass media needs a great deal of money
to do its work. As a result, most television channels
and newspapers are part of big business houses.
Mass media is constantly thinking of ways to make
money. One way in which the mass media earns
money is by advertising different things like cars,
chocolates, clothes, mobile phones, etc. You must
have noticed the number of advertisements that you
have to see while watching your favourite television
show. While watching a cricket match on TV, the
same advertisements are shown repeatedly between
each over and so you are often watching the same
image over and over again. As you will read in the
following chapter, advertisements are repeated in the
hope that you will go out and buy what is advertised.
67
The cost to advertise on a TV channel
varies from  1,000 to  1,00,000 per
10 seconds depending on the popularity
of the channel and time.
Media and democracy
In a democracy, the media plays a very important
role in providing news and discussing events taking
place in the country and the world. It is on the basis
of this information that citizens can, for example,
learn how government works. And often, if they wish
to, they can take action on the basis of these news
stories. Some of the ways in which they can do this
is by writing letters to the concerned minister,
organising a public protest, starting a signature
campaign, asking the government to rethink its
programme, etc.
Given the role that the media plays in providing
information, it is important that the information be
balanced. Let us understand what we mean by a
balanced media report by reading two versions of
the same news event given on the next page.
Chapter 6: Understanding Media
The print media offers a large variety of
information to suit the tastes of different
readers.
68
Social and Political Life
Are the above stories in the two
newspapers similar? And if not,
why not? What, in your view, are
the similarities and the
differences?
If you read the story in the News
of India, what would you think
about the issue?
T
he closure of one lakh factories in the
cityŏs residential areas is likely to become
a serious issue. On Monday, thousands of factory
owners and workers took to the streets to strongly
protest this closure. They said that their
livelihoods would be lost. They say that the fault
lies with the municipal corporation because it
continued to issue licenses for new factories to
be set up in residential areas.They also say that
there were no adequate relocation efforts. The
owners and workers plan a one-day city bandh
to protest against this closure. Mr. Sharma, one
of the factory owners said, őThe government says
that it has done a lot to relocate us. But the areas
they have sent us to have no facilities and have
not been developed for the last five years.Œ
Closure of factories causes unrest
Daily News Service
News of India Report
India Daily Report
The fact is that if you had read either newspaper
you would only know one side of the story. If you
had read the News of India, you would most likely
think of the protestors as a nuisance. Their
disrupting traffic and continually polluting the city
with their factories leaves you with a bad impression
about them. But on the other hand, if you had read
the story in the India Daily, you would know that
the protests are because a lot of livelihoods will be
lost if the factories close because the relocation efforts
have not been adequate. Neither of these stories is a
balanced report. A balanced report is one that
discusses all points of view of a particular story and
then leaves it to the readers to make up their minds.
Writing a balanced report, however, depends on
the media being independent. An independent media
means that no one should control and influence its
coverage of news. No one should tell the media what
Violent protests by owners
and workers brought the
city to a standstill today.
People getting to work
could not do so on time
because of huge traffic
jams. The owners and
workers are protesting the
governmentŏs decision to
close down polluting
factory units. Although the
government did take this
decision rather hastily, the
protestors have known for
quite some time that their
units are not legal.
Moreover the levels of
pollution in the city will be
greatly reduced by this
closure. Mr. Jain a well-
known figure in the city
said, őWith our city
gradually 
becoming
Indiasŏs new business hub,
it is important that it be a
clean and green city.
Polluting factories should
be moved. The factory
owners and workers
should 
accept 
the
relocation being offered by
the government instead of
protesting.Œ
Radhika Malik | INN
69
In many of our homes, TV is on a lot of the time. In many ways, a lot of our impressions
about the world around us are formed by what we see on TV: it is like a ¶window on the
world·. How do you think it influences us? TV has different types of programmes, soap
operas, like Saas Bhi Kabhi Bahu Thi, game shows, like Kaun Banega Crorepati, reality TV
shows like Big Boss, news, sports and cartoons.
Before, in between and after each programme
are advertisements. Since TV time costs so much
money, only those programmes that can attract
the maximum number of viewers are shown. Can
you think of what such programmes might be?
Think of what are the kinds of things that TV
shows and what it does not. Does it show us
more about the lives of the rich or the poor?
We need to think about what TV does to us,
how it shapes our views of the world, our beliefs,
attitudes and values. We need to realise that it gives us a partial view of the world. While
we enjoy our favourite programmes, we should always be aware of the large exciting
world beyond our TV screens. There is so much happening out there that TV ignores.  A
world beyond film stars, celebrities and rich lifestyles, a world that all of us need to reach
out to and respond to in various ways. We need to be active viewers, who question
whatever we see and hear, while we may enjoy it too!
What does TV do to us and what can we do with TV?
Do you think it is important to
know both sides of the story?
Why?
Pretend that you are a journalist
for a newspaper and write a
balanced story from the two news
reports.
can be included and what should not be included in
a news story. An independent media is important in
a democracy. As you read above, it is on the basis of
the information that the media provides that we take
action as citizens, so it is important that this
information is reliable and not biased.
However, the reality is that media is far from
independent. This is mainly because of two reasons.
The first is the control that the government has on
the media. When the government prevents either a
news item, or scenes from a movie, or the lyrics of a
song from being shared with the larger public, this
is referred to as censorship. There have been periods
in Indian history when the government censored the
media. The worst of these was the Emergency
between 1975²1977.
Chapter 6: Understanding Media
70
Social and Political Life
 While the government does continue to censor
films, it does not really censor the media·s coverage
of news. Despite the absence of censorship by the
government, most newspapers nowadays still fail to
provide a balanced story. The reasons for this are
complicated. Persons who research the media have
said that this happens because business houses
control the media. At times, it is in the interest of
these businesses to focus on only one side of the
story. Media·s continual need for money and its links
to advertising means that it becomes difficult for
media to be reporting against people who give them
advertisements. Media is, thus, no longer considered
independent because of its close links to business.
Besides the above, the media also tends to focus
on a particular aspect of a story because they believe
this makes the story interesting. Also, if they want
to increase public support for an issue, they often
do this by focusing on one side of a story.
Setting agendas
The media also plays an important role in deciding
what stories to focus on, and therefore, decides on
what is newsworthy. For example, the annual
function at your school is unlikely to make the news.
But if a famous actor is invited as the Chief Guest,
then the media might be interested in covering it. By
focusing on particular issues, the media influences
our thoughts, feelings and actions, and brings those
issues to our attention. Due to the significant
influence it plays in our lives and in shaping our
thoughts, it is commonly said that the media ¶sets
the agenda·.
Very recently, the media drew our attention to
alarming levels of pesticides in cola drinks. They
published reports that indicated the high level of
pesticides and, thus, made us aware of the need to
regularly monitor these colas according to
international quality and safety standards. They did
71
Recognising that the media will not be interested in
covering ¶small· issues that involve ordinary people and
their daily lives, several local groups have come forward
to start their own media. Several people use community
radio to tell farmers about the prices of different crops
and advise them on the use of seeds and fertilisers.
Others make documentary films with fairly cheap and
easily available video cameras on real-life conditions
faced by different poor communities, and, at times, have
even given the poor these video cameras to make films
on their own lives.
Another example is a newspaper called Khabar Lahriya which is a fortnightly that is run by
eight Dalit women in Chitrakoot district in Uttar Pradesh. Written in the local language,
Bundeli, this eight-page newspaper reports on Dalit issues and cases of violence against
women and political corruption. The newspaper reaches farmers, shopkeepers, panchayat
members, school teachers and women who have recently learnt to read and write.
Local media
Fashion shows are very popular with the
media.
What is the consequence of the
media ¶setting the agenda· by
reporting on the Fashion Week
rather than the slum demolitions?
Can you think of an issue that
does not seem important to you
because it is never featured in the
media?
this despite the government·s resistance by boldly
declaring that colas were unsafe. In covering this
story, the media positively helped us focus on an
issue that affects our lives and one that we might
not even have been aware of it had it not been for
media reporting.
There are several instances when the media fails
to focus on issues that are significant in our lives.
For example, drinking water is a major problem in
the country. Every year, thousands of people suffer
and die because they do not get safe drinking water.
However, we seldom find the media discussing this
issue. A well-known Indian journalist wrote of how
the Fashion Week, in which clothes designers show
their new creations to rich people, formed the front
page headlines of all the newspapers while several
slums were being demolished in Mumbai, the very
same week, and this was not even noticed!
As citizens of a democracy, the media has a very
important role to play in our lives because it is
through the media that we hear about issues related
Chapter 6: Understanding Media
72
Social and Political Life
to the working of the government. The media decides
what to focus on and in this way it ¶sets the agenda·.
The government can, at times, prevent the media
from publishing a story and this is called censorship.
Nowadays, media·s close relationship with business
often means that a balanced report is difficult to come
by. Given this, it is important for us to be aware that
the ¶factual information· that a news report provides
is often not complete and can be one-sided. We,
therefore, need to analyse the news by asking the
following questions: what is the information I am
learning from this report? What information is not
being provided? From whose point of view is the
article being written? Whose point of view is being
left out and why?
Social advertising
Social advertisements
refer to advertisements
made by the Government
or private agencies that
have a larger message
for society. The following
is a social advertisement
regarding crossing of
manned/unmanned
level crossings.
73
EXERCISES
1.
In what ways does the media play an important role in a
democracy?
2.
Can you give this diagram a title? What do you understand
about the link between media and big business from this
diagram?
3.
You have read about the ways in which the media ¶sets
the agenda·. What kind of effect does this have in a
democracy? Provide two examples to support your point
of view.
4.
As a class project, decide to focus on a particular news
topic and cut out stories from different newspapers on
this. Also watch the coverage of this topic on TV news.
Compare two newspapers and write down the similarity
and differences in their reports. It might help to ask the
following questions²
a. What information is this article providing?
b. What information is it leaving out?
c. From whose point of view is the article being written?
d. Whose point of view is being left out and why?
Glossary
Publish: This refers to newsreports, articles, interviews, stories, etc., that are printed in newspapers,
magazines and books for a wide audience to read.
Censorship: This refers to the powers that government has to disallow media from publishing or
showing certain stories.
Broadcast: In this chapter this word is used to refer to a TV or radio programme that is widely
transmitted.
Public protest: When a large number of people come together and openly state their opposition to
some issue. Organising a rally, starting a signature campaign, blocking roads etc. are some of the
ways in which this is done.
Chapter 6: Understanding Media
BIG BUSINESS HOUSES
READERS,
VIEWERS,
LISTENERS
advertise
their
products
MEDIA
promotes
products
through
advertisements
People buy
products
seen in the
media.
Money,
therefore,
flows back to
big business
houses
Some own radio,
TV, newspaper
5.
Do projects (solo, pair or group) about types of advertisements. Create commercial advertisements
about some products and social advertisements about public health, road safety and the need to
save water and energy.
UNIT
FIVE
Markets
Teacher·s note
These two chapters focus on aspects of
life and commercial cycles associated with
markets. While some of these processes
may be visible and, therefore, easily
observable, there are also others that are
relatively unfamiliar.
Chapter 7 discusses ¶Markets Around
Us·. At one level, we study different market
sites: a weekly market, neighbourhood
shops, a shopping complex, etc. At another
level, we explore the intricate question,
¶how do goods reach these markets?· We
examine how a chain of markets operates
and the role of wholesale markets within
this, through the case study of a wholesale
vegetable market. We usually associate
¶market· with marketplaces, but buying and
selling takes place in diverse ways and the
chapter discusses how all of this falls
within a larger understanding of markets.
Chapter 8 looks at how markets offer
people different opportunities. This is done
through the ¶story of a shirt·, and the chain
of markets involved in the process. Together
with understanding each step of the
manufacture and circulation of a shirt, we
realise that some people stand to gain in
the market transaction whereas others do
not gain as much, or none at all. The
opportunities are highly unequal. Ways do
exist, such as those of cooperative
marketing, which can provide a better
return to the producers. However, we need
to find many more viable avenues for
equitable distribution.
These chapters offer an opportunity of
bringing in the experience of local markets
for discussion in the classroom. A visit to
a wholesale market would be of interest,
and would allow the learner to find out the
profit margins and details of daily earnings
so that those inequalities can be directly
examined. The experiences of markets are
varied and also quite rich. Hence, one
should allocate time for some questions,
not addressed in the text, which students
may wish to discuss.
75
76
Social and Political Life
Markets Around Us
We go to the market to buy many things ² vegetables, soap, toothpaste, masala,
bread, rice, dal, clothes, notebooks, biscuits, etc. If we make a list of the goods
that we purchase, it would be really long. There are many kinds of markets that
we may visit for our everyday needs: these can include shops, hawker·s stalls in
our neighbourhood, a weekly market, a large shopping complex, perhaps even a
mall. In this chapter, we look at some of these markets and try to understand
how the goods that are sold there reach buyers, who these buyers are, who these
sellers are, and the sorts of problems they face.
7
CHAPTER
77
77
78
Social and Political Life
Why do people go to a weekly
market? Give three reasons.
Who are the sellers in a weekly
market? Why don·t we find big
business persons in these
markets?
Why are things cheap in the
weekly market?
Explain with an example how
people bargain in the market. Can
you think of a situation where the
bargain would be unfair?
Sameer is a small trader in the weekly
market. He buys clothes from a large
trader in the town and sells them in six
different markets in a week. He and
other cloth sellers move in groups. They
hire a mini van for this. His customers
are from villages that are near the
marketplace. At festival times, such as
during Deepavali or Pongal, he does
good business.
Sameer: Seller of clothes
Weekly market
A weekly market is so called because it is held on a
specific day of the week. Weekly markets do not have
permanent shops. Traders set up shops for the day
and then close them up in the evening.  Then they
may set up at a different place the next day. There
are thousands of such markets in India. People come
here for their everyday requirements.
Many things in weekly markets are available at
cheaper rates. This is because when shops are in
permanent buildings, they incur a lot of expenditure
² they have to pay rent, electricity, fees to the
government. They also have to pay wages to their
workers. In weekly markets, these shop owners store
the things they sell at home. Most of them are helped
by their family members and, hence, do not need to
hire workers. Weekly markets also have a large
number of shops selling the same goods which means
there is competition among them. If some trader were
to charge a high price, people would move to another
shop where the same thing may be available more
cheaply or where the buyer can bargain and bring
the price down.
One of the advantages of weekly markets is that
most things you need are available at one place.
Whether you want vegetables, groceries or cloth
items, utensils ² all of them can be found here. You
do not have to go to different areas to buy different
things. People also prefer going to a market where
they have a choice and a variety of goods.
Shops in the neighbourhood
We have seen that the weekly markets offer a variety
of goods. However, we also buy things from other
kinds of markets. There are many shops that sell
goods and services in our neighbourhoods. We may
buy milk from the dairy, groceries from departmental
stores, stationery, eatables or medicines from other
79
Sujata and Kavita were sent to buy
groceries from their neighbourhood
shop. This was the shop they usually
went to. It was crowded today. The
shop owner managed the shop
herself with two helpers. When they
managed to get into the shop, Sujata
dictated a list to her. She in turn
began asking her helpers to weigh
and pack the items. Meanwhile
Kavita looked around«
On the top left shelf there were
different brands of detergent cakes.
Another shelf had toothpastes,
talcum powder, shampoo, hair oil.
The different brands and different
colours looked so attractive.  On the
floor lay a few sacks.
It took almost 20 minutes to weigh
and pack all the groceries.  Then
Sujata showed her ´notebook.µ  The
woman noted the amount of
` 3000 in the notebook and gave it
back.  She also noted the amount
in her big register.  Then Sujata took the heavy bags out of the shop.  Her family will pay for the
purchases in the first week of next month.
Why did Sujata carry a notebook?
Do you think this system is
useful? Can there be problems?
What are the different kinds of
shops that you find in your
neighbourhood? What do you
purchase from them?
Why are goods sold in permanent
shops costlier than those sold in
the weekly markets or by roadside
hawkers?
Chapter 7: Markets Around Us
shops. Many of these are permanent shops, while
others are roadside stalls such as that of the
vegetable hawker, the fruit vendor, the mechanic,
etc.
Shops in the neighbourhood are useful in many
ways.  They are near our home and we can go there
on any day of the week.  Usually, the buyer and seller
know each other and these shops also provide goods
on credit. This means that you can pay for the
purchases later, as we saw in Sujata·s case, for
example.
80
Social and Political Life
Why do you think the guard
wanted to stop Kavita and Sujata
from entering the shop? What
would you say if someone stops
you from entering a shop in a
market?
You might have noticed that there are different
kinds of sellers even in the neighbourhood markets.
Some of them have permanent shops and others sell
their goods on the roadside.
Anzal Mall is a five-floor shopping
complex. Kavita and Sujata were
enjoying going up and down in
the lift.  It seemed as if it was
made of glass and they were able
to see outside as they went up.
It was fascinating to see so many
different kinds of shops such as
the ice-cream, burger, pizza and
other food shops; shops full of
home appliances; footwear and
leather items as well as
bookshops.
While wandering about on the
third floor they entered a shop
that was selling branded ready-
made clothes.The security guard
looked at them as if he wanted
to stop them but he did not say
anything. They looked at some
dresses and then looked at the
price tag. None of them was less
than ` 3,000, almost five times the weekly market price!  Sujata whispered to Kavita, ´I·ll take you to
another shop which has good quality ready-made clothes at more reasonable pricesµ.
Shopping complexes and malls
So far we have seen two kinds of marketplaces ²
weekly markets and markets in our neighbourhood.
There are other markets in the urban area that have
many shops, popularly called shopping complexes.
These days, in many urban areas, you also have large
multi-storeyed air-conditioned buildings with shops
on different floors, known as malls. In these urban
markets, you get both branded and non-branded
goods. As you have read in the chapter on advertising,
81
How do you think your
neighbourhood shop gets its
goods? Find out and explain with
some examples.
Why is a wholesale trader
necessary?
branded goods are expensive, often promoted by
advertising and claims of better quality. The
companies producing these products sell them
through shops in large urban markets and, at times,
through special showrooms. As compared to non-
branded goods, fewer people can afford to buy
branded ones.
Chain of markets
In the previous sections, you have read about
different markets from where we buy goods. From
where do you think shop-owners procure their goods?
Goods are produced in factories, on farms and in
homes. However, we don·t buy directly from the
factory or from the farm. Nor would the producers
be interested in selling us small quantities such as
one kilo of vegetables or one plastic mug.
The people in between the producer and the final
consumer are the traders. The wholesale trader first
buys goods in large quantities. For example, the
vegetable wholesale trader will not buy a few kilos of
vegetables, but will buy in large lots of 25 to 100
kilos. These will then be sold to other traders. In
these markets, buying and selling takes place
between traders. It is through these links of traders
that goods reach faraway places. The trader who
finally sells this to the consumer, is the retailer. This
could be a trader in a weekly market, a hawker in
the neighbourhood or a shop in a shopping complex.
We can understand this with the help of the
following examples ²
Every city has areas for wholesale markets. This
is where goods first reach and are then supplied to
other traders. The roadside hawker whom you read
about earlier would have purchased a large quantity
of plastic items from a wholesale trader in the town.
He, in turn, might have bought these from another,
even bigger wholesale trader in the city. The city
Chapter 7: Markets Around Us
Why do people not bargain in
shops located in malls whereas
they bargain in weekly markets?
The above map of Delhi shows four of the
10 wholesale markets in the city.
Keshopur
Azadpur
Daryaganj
Okhla
82
Social and Political Life
Aftab is one of the wholesale traders who purchases in bulk. His
business starts around 2 o·clock in the morning when vegetables
reach the market. This is the time when the vegetable market or
mandi starts buzzing with activity. The vegetables come in trucks,
matadors, tractor trolleys from farms both near and far. Soon the
process of auctions begins. Aftab participates in this auction and
decides what he will buy.  Today, for example, he bought 5 quintals of
cauliflower, 10 quintals of onions. He has a shop in the market where
he stores the vegetables that he has bought. From here he sells to
hawkers and shopkeepers who start coming to the market around
six in the morning. They have to organise their purchases so that
they can start their shop for the day around ten in the morning.
Aftab ²The wholesaler in the city
wholesale trader would have bought a large quantity
of plastic items from the factory and stored them in
a godown. In this way, a chain of markets is set up.
When we purchase, we may not be aware of the chain
of markets through which these goods travel before
they reach us.
Markets everywhere
So far we have seen different marketplaces where
people buy and sell a variety of goods and services.
All these markets are in a specific locality and work
in a particular manner and time. However, it is not
always necessary that one has to go to the market to
purchase goods. You can place orders for a variety
of things through the phone and these days through
the Internet, and the goods are delivered at your
home. In clinics and nursing homes, you may have
noticed sales representatives waiting for doctors.
Such persons are also engaged in the selling of goods.
Thus, buying and selling takes place in different
ways, not necessarily through shops in the market.
The markets that we looked at above are the ones
that we recognise easily. However, there are markets
that we may not be so aware of. This is because a
83
People in urban areas can enter markets
without stepping out of their homes via
the Internet. They use their credit cards to
make īonline purchasesĬ.
large number of goods are bought and sold that we
don·t use directly. For example, a farmer uses
fertilisers to grow crops that he purchases from
special shops in the city and they, in turn get them
from factories.  A car factory purchases engine, gears,
petrol tanks, axles, wheels, etc., from various other
factories. We don·t usually see all the buying and
selling, but only the final product ² the car in the
showroom. The story is similar for any other good.
Markets and equality
In this chapter, we have looked at shop owners in a
weekly market and those in a shopping complex.
They are very different people. One is a small trader
with little money to run the shop whereas the other
is able to spend a lot of money to set up the shop.
They also earn unequal amounts. The weekly market
trader earns little compared to the profit of a regular
shop owner in a shopping complex. Similarly, buyers
are differently placed. There are many who are not
able to afford the cheapest of goods while others are
busy shopping in malls. Thus, whether we can be
buyers or sellers in these different markets depends,
among other things, on the money that we have.
We have also examined  the chain of markets that
is formed before goods can reach us. It is through
A car being put together in a factory.
Chapter 7: Markets Around Us
84
Social and Political Life
Malls, like the one above, sell expensive
and branded goods.
this chain that what is produced in one place reaches
people everywhere. When things are sold, it
encourages production and new opportunities are
created for people to earn. However, do they offer
equal opportunities? We will try to understand this
through the story of a shirt in the next chapter.
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
www.in.undp.org
85
EXERCISES
1.
In what ways is a hawker different from a shop owner?
2.
Compare and contrast a weekly market and a shopping
complex on the following:
Market
Kind of goods sold
Prices of goods
Sellers
Buyers
Weekly market
Shopping complex
Glossary
Weekly market: These markets are not daily markets but are to be found at a particular place on
one or maybe two days of the week. These markets most often sell everything that a household
needs ranging from vegetables to clothes to utensils.
Mall: This is an enclosed shopping space. This is usually a large building with many floors that has
shops, restaurants and, at times, even a cinema theatre. These shops most often sell branded
products.
Wholesale: This refers to buying and selling in large quantities. Most products, including vegetables,
fruits and flowers have special wholesale markets.
Chain of markets: A series of markets that are connected like links in a chain because products
pass from one market to another.
3.
Explain how a chain of markets is formed. What purpose
does it serve?
4.
¶All persons have equal rights to visit any shop in a
marketplace.· Do you think this is true of shops with
expensive products? Explain with examples.
5.
¶Buying and selling can take place without going to a
marketplace.· Explain this statement with the help of
examples.
Chapter 7: Markets Around Us
86
Social and Political Life
A Shirt in
the Market
This chapter tells us the story
of a shirt ! It begins with the
production of cotton and ends
with the sale of the shirt. We
shall see that a chain of
markets links the producer of
cotton to the buyer of the
shirt in the supermarket.
Buying and selling takes place
at every step in the chain.
Does everyone benefit equally
from this? Or do some people
benefit more than others? We
shall find out.
8
CHAPTER
87
Did Swapna get a fair price on the
cotton?
Why did the trader pay Swapna
a low price?
Where do you think large farmers
would sell their cotton? How is
their situation different from
Swapna?
A cotton farmer in Kurnool
Swapna, a small farmer in Kurnool (Andhra Pradesh)
grows cotton on her small piece of land. The bolls of
the cotton plant are ripe and some have already
burst, so Swapna is busy picking cotton. The bolls,
which carry the cotton in them, do not burst open
all at once so it takes several days to harvest the
cotton.
Once the cotton is collected, instead of selling it at
Kurnool cotton market, Swapna and her husband
take the harvest to the local trader. At the beginning
of the cropping season, Swapna had borrowed
` 2,500 from the trader at a very high interest rate
to buy seeds, fertilisers, pesticides for cultivation.
At that time, the local trader made Swapna agree to
another condition. He made her promise to sell all
her cotton to him.
Cultivation of cotton requires high levels of inputs
such as fertilisers and pesticides and the farmers
have to incur heavy expenses on account of these.
Most often, the small farmers need to borrow money
to meet these expenses.
At the trader·s yard, two of his men weigh the
bags of cotton. At a price of ` 1,500 per quintal, the
cotton fetches ` 6,000. The trader deducts
` 3,000 for repayment of loan and interest and pays
Swapna ` 3,000.
Swapna: ` 3,000 only!
Trader: Cotton is selling cheap. There is a lot of
cotton in the market.
Swapna: I have toiled so hard for four months to
grow this cotton. You can see how fine and clean the
cotton is this time. I had hoped to get a much better
price.
Chapter 8: A Shirt in the Market
87
88
Social and Political Life
A shop in Erode.
Trader: Amma, I am giving you a good price. Other
traders are not even paying this much. You can check
at the Kurnool market, if you do not believe me.
Swapna: Don·t be angry. How can I doubt you? I had
only hoped that we would earn enough from the
cotton crop to last us a few months.
Though Swapna knows that cotton will sell for at
least ` 1,800 per quintal, she doesn·t argue further.
The trader is a powerful man in the village and the
farmers have to depend on him for loans not only for
cultivation, but also to meet other exigencies such
as illnesses, children·s school fees. Also, there are
times in the year when there is no work and no
income for the farmers, so borrowing money is the
only means of survival.
Swapna·s earning from cotton cultivation is barely
more than what she might have earned as a wage
labourer.
The cloth market of Erode
Erode·s bi-weekly cloth market in Tamil Nadu is one
of the largest cloth markets in the world. A large
variety of cloth is sold in this market. Cloth that is
made by weavers in the villages around is also
brought here for sale. Around the market are offices
of cloth merchants who buy this cloth. Other traders
from many south Indian towns also come and
purchase cloth in this market.
 On market days, you would also find weavers
bringing cloth that has been made on order from the
merchant. These merchants supply cloth on order
to garment manufacturers and exporters around the
country. They purchase the yarn and give
instructions to the weavers about the kind of cloth
that is to be made. In the following example, we can
see how this is done.
89
1.This is a merchantĬs shop in the bazaar.
Over the years, these traders have
developed extensive contacts with
garment firms around the country from
whom they get orders. These traders
purchase the yarn (thread) from others.
2. The weavers live in villages around
and take the yarn supplied by these
traders to their homes where the looms
are located in sheds adjacent to their
houses. This photograph shows a
powerloom in one such home.
The weavers and their families spend
long hours working on these looms.
Most weaving units have about  2ĩ8
powerlooms on which the yarn is woven
into cloth. A variety of sarees, towels,
shirting, ladies dress material and
bedsheets are produced in these looms.
3. They then bring back the finished cloth
to the traders. Here, they can be seen
getting ready to go to the merchant in the
town. The trader keeps an account of the
yarn given and pays them money for
weaving this into cloth.
1
2
3
What are the following people
doing at the Erode cloth market²
merchants, weavers, exporters?
In what ways are weavers
dependent on cloth merchants?
Putting-out system² weavers producing
cloth at home
The merchant distributes work among the weavers
based on the orders he has received for cloth. The
weavers get the yarn from the merchant and supply
him the cloth. For the weavers, this arrangement
seemingly has two advantages. The weavers do not
have to spend their money on purchase of yarn. Also,
the problem of selling the finished cloth is taken care
of. Weavers know from the outset what cloth they
should make and how much of it is to be woven.
However, this dependence on the merchants both
for raw materials and markets means that the
merchants have a lot of power. They give orders for
what is to be made and they pay a very low price for
making the cloth. The weavers have no way of
Chapter 8: A Shirt in the Market
90
Social and Political Life
Weaver·s cooperative
We have seen that the weavers are paid very little by the
merchant under the putting out system. Weaver·s cooperatives
are one way to reduce the dependence on the merchant and to
earn a higher income for the weavers.  In a cooperative, people
with common interests come together and work for their mutual
benefit. In a weaver·s cooperative, the weavers form a group and
take up certain activities collectively. They procure yarn from
the yarn dealer and distribute it among the weavers. The
cooperative also does the marketing. So, the role of the merchant
is reduced, and weavers get a fair price on the cloth.
At times, the government helps the cooperatives by buying cloth from them at a reasonable
price. For instance, the Tamil Nadu government runs a Free School Uniform programme in
the state. The government procures the cloth for this programme from the powerloom weaver·s
cooperatives.  Similarly, the government buys cloth from the handloom weaver·s cooperatives
and sells it through stores known as Co-optex. You might have come across one of these
stores in your town.
If the weavers were to buy yarn on
their own and sell cloth, they
would probably earn three times
more. Do you think this is
possible? How? Discuss.
Do you find similar ¶putting-out·
arrangements in making papads,
masalas, beedis? Find out about
this in your area and discuss in
class.
You might have heard of
cooperatives in your area. It could
be in milk, provisions, paddy, etc.
Find out for whose benefit they
were set up?
knowing who they are making the cloth for or at
what price it will be sold. At the cloth market, the
merchants sell the cloth to the garment factories. In
this way, the market works more in favour of the
merchants.
Weavers invest all their savings or borrow money
at high interest rates to buy looms. Each loom costs
` 20,000, so a small weaver with two looms has to
invest ` 40,000. The work on these looms cannot be
done alone. The weaver and another adult member
of his family work upto 12 hours a day to produce
cloth. For all this work, they earn about
` 3,500 per month.
The arrangement between the merchant and the
weavers is an example of putting-out system,
whereby the merchant supplies the raw material and
receives the finished product. It is prevalent in the
weaving industry in most regions of India.
91
What are the demands foreign
buyers make on the garment
exporters? Why do the garment
exporters agree to these
demands?
How do the garment exporters
meet the conditions set by the
foreign buyers?
The garment exporting factory near Delhi
The Erode merchant supplies the cotton cloth
produced by the weavers to a garment exporting
factory near Delhi. The garment exporting factory
will use the cloth to make shirts. The shirts will be
exported to foreign buyers. Among the foreign buyers
are businesspersons from the US and Europe who
run a chain of stores. These large stores do business
strictly on their own terms. They demand the lowest
prices from the supplier. In addition, they set high
standards for quality of production and timely
delivery. Any defects or delay in delivery is dealt with
strictly. So, the exporter tries his best to meet the
conditions set by these powerful buyers.
Faced with such pressures from the buyers, the
garment exporting factories, in turn, try to cut costs.
They get the maximum work out of the workers at
the lowest possible wages. This way they can
maximise their own profits and also supply the
garments to foreign buyers at a cheap price.
Women workers sewing buttons in a
garment factory.
Chapter 8: A Shirt in the Market
92
Social and Political Life
Payment to workers (per month)
Tailoring .......................................................` 3,000
Ironing..........................................................` 1.50 (per piece)
Checking .....................................................` 2,000
Thread cutting
and buttoning.............................................` 1,500
Write a letter to the Minister
asking for what you think would
be proper payment to the workers.
The Impex garment factory has 70 workers. Most
of them are women. Most of these workers are
employed on a temporary basis. This means that
whenever the employer feels that a worker is not
needed, the worker can be asked to leave. Workers·
wages are fixed according to their skills. The highest
paid among the workers are the tailors who get about
` 3,000 per month. Women are employed as helpers
for thread cutting, buttoning, ironing and packaging.
These jobs have the lowest wages.
The shirt in the United States
A number of shirts are on display at a large clothes
shop in the United States, and are priced at $26.
That is, each shirt sells for $26 or around ` 1,800.
Use the diagram shown in the margin to fill
in the blanks below.
The businessperson purchased the shirts from
the garment exporter in Delhi for ` _______ per shirt.
He then spent ` _______ for advertising in the media,
and another ` _______ per shirt on storage, display
and all other charges. Thus, the cost to this person
is ` 900 while he sells the shirt for ` 1,800.
` __________ is his profit on one shirt! If he is able to
sell a large number of shirts, his profit will be higher.
The garment exporter sold the shirt at ` 300 per
piece. The cloth and other raw materials cost him
` 100 per shirt. The workers· wages cost another
Why do you think more women are
employed in the Impex garment
factory? Discuss.
Purchase
  `
  `
  `
  `
  ` 300
Storage, etc.
  `
  `
  `
  `
  ` 200
Advertising
  `
  `
  `
  `
  ` 400
Profit
````` 900
The shirt below shows the profit
made by the businessperson, and
the various costs that he had to
pay. Find out from the diagram
below, what the cost price
includes.
93
Compare the earnings per shirt of
the worker in the garment factory,
the garment exporter and the
businessperson in the market
abroad. What do you find?
What are the reasons that the
businessperson is able to make a
huge profit in the market?
You have read the chapter on
advertising. Why does the
businessperson spend Rs 300 per
shirt on advertising? Discuss.
People who gained in the market
People who didn·t gain
as much in the market
1.
________________________
2.
________________________
3.
________________________
1.
________________________
2.
________________________
3.
________________________
` 25 per shirt. The cost of running his office came to
` 25 per shirt. Can you calculate the profit per shirt
for the garment exporter?
Who are the gainers in the market?
A chain of markets links the producer of cotton to
the buyer at the supermarket. Buying and selling
takes place at every step in the chain. Let us recall
who were the people who were involved in this
process of buying and selling. Did they all gain as
much? There were people who made profits in the
market and there were some who did not gain as
much from this buying and selling. Despite their
having toiled very hard, they earned little. Can you
place them in the table shown here?
Market and equality
The foreign businessperson made huge profits in the
market. Compared to this, the garment exporter
made only moderate profits. On the other hand, the
earnings of the workers at the garment export factory
are barely enough to cover their day-to-day needs.
Similarly, we saw the small cotton farmer and the
weaver at Erode put in long hours of hard work. But
they did not get a fair price in the market for what
they produced. The merchants or traders are
somewhere in between. Compared to the weavers,
they have earned more but it is still much less than
the exporter. Thus, not everyone gains equally in
the market. Democracy is also about getting a fair
wage in the market. Whether it is Kanta or Swapna,
if families don·t earn enough how would they think
of themselves as equal to others?
On one hand, the market offers people
opportunities for work and to be able to sell things
that they grow or produce. It could be the farmer
selling cotton or the weaver producing cloth. On the
other hand, it is usually the rich and the powerful
Chapter 8: A Shirt in the Market
94
Social and Political Life
Did you know that the readymade clothes
that you buy require the work of so many
different persons?
that get the maximum earnings from the market.
These are the people who have money and own the
factories, the large shops, large land holdings, etc.
The poor have to depend on the rich and the powerful
for various things. They have to depend for loans (as
in the case of Swapna, the small farmer), for raw
materials and marketing of their goods (weavers in
the putting out system), and most often for
employment (workers at the garment factory).
Because of this dependence, the poor are exploited
in the market. There are ways to overcome these such
as forming cooperatives of producers and ensuring
that laws are followed strictly.
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
www.in.undp.org
95
EXERCISES
1.
What made Swapna sell the cotton to the trader instead
of selling at the Kurnool cotton market?
2.
Describe the conditions of employment  as well as the
wages of workers in the garment exporting factory. Do
you think the workers get a fair deal?
3.
Think of something common that we use. It could be
sugar, tea, milk, pen, paper, pencil, etc. Discuss through
what chain of markets this reaches you. Can you think of
the people that help in the production or trade?
4.
Arrange the statements given alongside in the correct
order and then fill in the numbers in the cotton bolls
accordingly. The first two have already been done for you.
1
3
1. Swapna sells the cotton to the trader.
2. Customers buy these shirts in a
supermarket.
3. Trader sells cotton to the Ginning Mill.
4. Garment exporters buy the cloth from
merchants for making shirts.
5. Yarn dealers or merchants give the
yarn to the weavers.
6. The exporter sells shirts to the
businessperson from the USA.
7.Spinning mill buys the cotton and sells
yarn to the yarn dealers.
8.Weavers return with the cloth.
9. Ginning mill cleans the cotton and
makes it into bales.
Glossary
Ginning mill: A factory where seeds are removed from cotton bolls. The cotton is pressed into
bales to be sent for spinning into thread.
Exporter: A person who sells goods abroad.
Profit: The amount that is left or gained from earnings after deducting all the costs. If the costs are
more than the earnings, it would lead to a loss.
Chapter 8: A Shirt in the Market
96
Social and Political Life
References
Dreze, Jean and Aparajita Goyal. 2003. ¶Future of Mid-day Meals·.
In Economic and Political Weekly.
Hossain, Sakhawat Rokeya. 1905. (reprint) 1988. Sultana·s Dream.
Feminist Press, New York.
Kumar. Krishna. 1986. ´Growing Up Maleµ in Seminar 318.
Mazumdar, Indrani. 2007. Women and Globalization: The Impact on Women
Workers in the Formal and Informal Sectors in India. Stree, Kolkata.
Mead, Margaret. 1928, 1973. (edition) Growing Up In Samoa.
American Museum of Natural History, Washington D.C.
Medical Council of India, http://www.mciindia.org/Rules-and-
Regulation/Ethics%20Regulations-2002.pdf
Parks, Rosa. 2000. Quiet Strength. Grand Rapids, Zondervan, Michigan.
Rashsundari Devi. 1999. Words to Win. Translated and with an introduction
by Tanika Sarkar. Zubaan, New Delhi.
Roy, Tirthankar. 1999. ¶Growth and Recession in Small-Scale Industry: A
Study of Tamil Nadu Powerlooms· Economic and Political Weekly.
World Health Organization, Essential medicines and health products,
http://www.who.int/medicines/services/inn/en/
www.cehat.org/rthc/policybrieffinal.pdf
www.in.undp.org (Sustainable Development Goals ² SDGs)
www.infochangeindia.org
Zubaan. 1996. Poster Women: A Visual History of the Women·s Movement in
India. Zubaan, New Delhi.
97
© Government of India, Copyright 2006
1.
The responsibility for the correctness of internal details rests with the publisher.
2.
The territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from the appropriate base line.
3.
The administrative headquarters of Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab are at Chandigarh.
4.
The interstate boundaries amongst Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya shown on this map are as interpreted from the §North
Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971,¨but have yet to be verified.
5.
The external boundaries and coastlines of India agree with the Record / Master Copy certified by Survey of India.
6
The state boundaries between Uttarakhand & Uttar Pradesh, Bihar & Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh & Madhya Pradesh have not been
verified by the Goverments concerned.
7.
The spellings of names in this map have been taken from various sources.
2
UNIT
ONE
3
Equality in Indian Democracy
Teacher·s note
This Unit introduces the learner to the
critical role of equality in democracy, with
specific reference to India. The Constitution
of India guarantees equality to all citizens.
Despite this, the daily lives of people in
India are far from equal. Earlier
discussions on equality in Civics textbooks
most often reiterated certain provisions of
the Constitution without adequately
considering the reality of these in people·s
lives. This Unit adopts a different approach.
It discusses the need for equality through
highlighting the inequalities that continue
to be practised and experienced by various
communities.
The government·s role in passing laws and
instituting policies is discussed to show that
commitment to the alleviation of existing
inequalities is a major part of the work that
governments undertake. The chapter also
briefly introduces an issue of inequality in
the United States of America to highlight
that this is a global phenomenon and a
feature of many democratic countries.
This chapter aims to help the learner
understand that equality and democracy
are dynamic and not static concepts. This
dynamism is reflected in the government·s
passing of new laws and programmes, and
in people·s movements around various
social and economic issues.
Local situations should be used as a
practical reference to make the discussion
on underlying concepts more relevant and
appropriate. A discussion on equality in the
classroom requires empathy as well as a
firm commitment on the teacher·s part to
ensuring that the dignity of all learners be
respected.
3
4
Social and Political Life
CHAPTER
On Equality
Equality in Indian democracy
The Indian Constitution recognises every person as
equal. This means that every individual in the
country, including male and female persons from
all castes, religions, tribes, educational and economic
backgrounds are recognised as equal. This is not to
say that inequality ceases to exist. It doesn·t. But
atleast, in democratic India, the principle of the
equality of all persons is recognised. While earlier
no law existed to protect people from discrimination
and ill-treatment, now there are several that work to
see that people are treated with dignity and as equals.
This recognition of equality includes some of the
following provisions in the Constitution: first that
every person is equal before the law. What this means
is that every person, from the President of the country
to Kanta, a domestic worker, has to obey the same
laws. Second, no person can be discriminated against
on the basis of their religion, race, caste, place of
birth or whether they are female or male. Third, every
person has access to all public places including
playgrounds, hotels, shops and markets. All persons
can use publicly available wells, roads and bathing
ghats. Fourth, untouchability has been abolished.
Can you think of an incident in
your life in which your dignity was
violated? How did this make you
feel?
In the 1975 film, Deewar, a boy who
works as a shoeshine refuses to pick up a
coin thrown at him. He feels that there
is dignity in the work that he does and
insists that his fee be given respectfully.
6
Social and Political Life
children would often go home for lunch and then not
return to school but now with the midday meal being
provided in school, their attendance has improved.
Their mothers, who earlier had to interrupt their work
to feed their children at home during the day, now
no longer need to do so. This programme has also
helped reduce caste prejudices because  children of
all castes in the school eat this meal together, and in
quite a few places, Dalit women have been employed
to cook the meal. The midday meal programme also
helps reduce the hunger of poor students who often
come to school and cannot concentrate because their
stomachs are empty.
While government programmes play an important
role in increasing equality of opportunity, there is much
that still needs to be done. While the midday meal
programme has helped increase the enrolment and
attendance of poor children in school, there continues
to be big differences in our country between schools
that the rich attend and those that the poor attend.
Even today there are several schools in the country in
which Dalit children are discriminated against and
treated unequally. These children are forced into
unequal situations in which their dignity is not
respected. This is because people refuse to think of
them as equal even though the law requires it.
One of the main reasons for this is that attitudes
change very slowly. Even though persons are aware
that discrimination is against the law, they continue
to treat people unequally on the basis of their caste,
religion, disability, economic status and because they
are women. It is only when people begin to believe
that no one is inferior, and that every person deserves
to be treated with dignity, that present attitudes can
change. Establishing equality in a democratic society
is a continuous struggle and one in which individuals
as well as various communities in India contribute to
and you will read more about this in this book.
Issues of equality in other democracies
You are probably wondering whether India is the only
democratic country in which there is inequality and
Children being served their midday
meal at a government school in
Uttarakhand.
What is the midday meal
programme? Can you list three
benefits of the programme? How
do you think this programme
might help promote greater
equality?
Find out about one government
scheme in your area. What does
this scheme do? Whom is this
scheme set up to benefit?
7
where the struggle for equality continues to exist.
The truth is that in many democratic countries
around the world, the issue of equality continues to
be the key issue around which communities struggle.
So, for example, in the United States of America, the
African²Americans whose ancestors were the slaves
who were brought over from Africa, continue to
describe their lives today as largely unequal. This,
despite the fact that there was a movement in the
late 1950s to push for equal rights for African²
Americans. Prior to this, African²Americans were
treated extremely unequally in the United States and
denied equality through law. For example, when
travelling by bus, they either had to sit at the back of
the bus or get up from their seat whenever a white
person wished to sit.
Rosa Parks (1913²2005) was an African²American
woman. Tired from a long day at work she refused to give
up her seat on a bus to a white man on 1 December 1955.
Her refusal that day started a huge agitation against
the unequal ways in which African²Americans were
treated and which came to be known as the Civil
Rights Movement. The Civil Rights Act of 1964
prohibited discrimination on the basis of race,
religion or national origin. It also stated that all
schools would be open to African²American children
and that they would no longer have to attend
ĮIt is disgraceful to live at the cost of
one's self-respect. Self-respect is the most
vital factor in life. Without it, man is a
cipher. To live worthily with self-
respect, one has to overcome difficulties.
It is out of hard and ceaseless struggle
alone that one derives strength,
confidence and recognition.
ĮMan is mortal. Everyone has to die
some day or the other. But one must
resolve to lay down one's life in
enriching the noble ideals of self-respect
and in bettering one's human life...
Nothing is more disgraceful for a brave
man than to live life devoid of self-
respect.į
ĩ B.R. Ambedkar
Chapter 1: On Equality
Rosa Parks, an Africanĩ
American woman, changed
the course of American
history with one defiant act.
8
Social and Political Life
separate schools specially set up for them. However,
despite this, a majority of African²Americans
continue to be among the poorest in the country.
Most African-American children can only afford to
attend government schools that have fewer facilities
and poorly qualified teachers as compared to white
students who either go to private schools or live in
areas where the government schools are as highly
rated as private schools.
Challenge of democracy
No country can be described as being completely
democratic. There are always communities and
individuals trying to expand the idea of democracy
and push for a greater recognition of equality on
existing as well as new issues. Central to this is the
struggle for the recognition of all persons as equal
and for their dignity to be maintained. In this book
you will read about how this issue of equality affects
various aspects of our daily lives in democratic India.
As you read these chapters, think about whether
the equality of all persons and their being able to
maintain their dignity is upheld.
Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth.
(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race,
caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of
them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to ²
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment;
or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort maintained
wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general public.
Excerpt from Article 15 of the Indian Constitution
9
EXERCISES
1.
In a democracy why is universal adult franchise important?
2.
Re-read the box on Article 15 and state two ways in which
this Article addresses inequality?
3.
 What do you understand by the term ´all persons are equal
before the lawµ? Why do you think it is important in a
democracy?
4.
According to the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act,
2016, persons with disabilities have equal rights, and that
the government should make possible their full
participation in society. The government has to provide
free education and integrate children with disabilities into
mainstream schools. This law also states that all public
places including buildings, schools, etc., should be
accessible and provided with ramps.
Look at the photograph and think about the boy who is being
carried down the stairs. Do you think the above law is being
implemented in his case? What needs to be done to make the
building more accessible for him? How would his being carried
down the stairs affect his dignity as well as his safety?
Glossary
Universal adult franchise:  This is a very important aspect of democratic societies. It means that all
adult (those who are 18 and above) citizens have the right to vote irrespective of their social or
economic backgrounds.
Dignity: This refers to thinking of oneself and other persons as worthy of respect.
Constitution:  This is a document that lays down the basic rules and regulations for people and
the government in the country to follow.
Civil Rights Movement: A movement that began in USA in 1950s in which African²American
people demanded equal rights and an end to racial discrimination.
http://disabilityaffairs.gov.in
Chapter 1: On Equality
10
Social and Political Life
Chapter 1: On Equality
UNIT
TWO
11
Teacher·s note
These two chapters (Chapters 2 and 3) on
State Government are an attempt to
discuss the functions and structure of
government through concrete situations.
We have chosen ¶health· as an example;
there could have been other, equally
important, choices.
Chapter 2 discusses ¶health· as an
important issue for people. There are both
public and private aspects of health
provisioning. Healthcare in India is not
available to all. While the Constitution
supports a view that the right to health is
an aspect of our fundamental rights, its
provisioning is rather unequal. Through
the accounts provided, learners will begin
to visualise the ideal or desired role of
government, and the meanings behind its
structures. Some ways in which this
situation can be changed are also
discussed.
Chapter 3 focuses on how the
government functions, and discusses ideas
of representation, accountability and
public welfare. Though both the executive
and the legislature are presented, one
should not expect students to retain fine
distinctions. It would be best to patiently
encourage them to ask questions such as,
´Who is the most powerful person?µ, ´Why
can·t the MLA solve the problem?µ, etc.
Such queries will enable them to construct
a sense of the government apparatus.
It is important that learners acquire the
confidence to express their views on public
issues and understand the role of
government through the exercises given in
the chapters. You could choose familiar
issues such as water, transport, school-
fees, books, child-labour, etc., for them to
discuss and arrive at how these problems
need to be tackled. Allow them to express
these ideas through wall charts. Given that
discussions on the government and its
functioning often lead to boredom and
cynicism, we need to be able to make
the classroom session less didactic and
more interactive while teaching these
lessons.
State Government
11
12
2
CHAPTER
In a democracy people expect the
government to work for their welfare. This
could be through the provision of
education, health, employment, housing
or the development of roads, electricity
etc. In this chapter we shall examine the
meanings and problems related to health.
Look at the sub-headings of this chapter.
In what ways do you think this topic is
related to the work of government?
Role of the
Government
in Health
13
13
What is health?
We can think of health in many ways. Health means
our ability to remain free of illness and injuries. But
health isn·t only about disease. You may have
associated only some of the situations in the above
collage with health. What we often ignore is the fact
that each of the above situations is related to health.
Apart from disease, we need to think of other factors
that affect our health. For example, if people get clean
drinking water or a pollution free environment they
are likely to be healthy. On the other hand, if people
do not get adequate food to eat or have to live in
cramped conditions, they will be prone to illness.
All of us would like to be active and in good spirits
in whatever we may be doing. It isn·t healthy to be
dull, inactive, anxious or scared for long stretches of
time. We all need to be without mental strain. All of
these various aspects of our lives are a part of health.
Pick two situations from the above
collage that are not related to
illness and write two sentences on
how they are related to health.
Would you associate all or some of
these pictures with ¶health· ? In
what ways? Discuss in groups.
Chapter 2: Role of the Government in Health
15
Patients usually have to wait in long
queues in government hospitals, like
this one.
India has a large number of doctors, clinics and
hospitals. The country also has considerable
experience and knowledge in running a public
healthcare system. This is a system of hospitals and
health centres run by the government. It has the
ability to look after the health of a large section of
its population scattered over hundreds of thousands
of villages. We will go into more detail on this later.
Moreover, there has been a phenomenal
advancement in medical sciences whereby many new
technologies and treatment procedures are available
in the country.
However, the second column points out how poor
the health situation in our country is. With all the
above positive developments we are not able to provide
proper healthcare facilities to people. This is the
paradox ² something that is contrary to what we
would expect. Our country has the money, knowledge
and people with experience but cannot make the
necessary healthcare available to all. In this chapter,
we will look at some of the reasons for this.
Chapter 2: Role of the Government in Health
16
Social and Political Life
THE COST OF A CURE
Aman and Ranjan are good friends. While Ranjan
comes from a well-to-do family, Aman·s parents have
to struggle to make ends meet...
Hi Aman! Good to
see you back! How have
you been?
I had viral fever and
had to go to the
hospital...
Oh! Me, too! I just got back to
school on Monday. My Daddy
took me to see the doctor
at the new hospital in
Kingsway. It was very exciting!
The building looked so posh. I thought it
was a five star hotel! Daddy said that was
because it was a private hospital, with the
best of facilities.
Daddy had to pay Rs 500 at the reception counter
itself ² before we even met the doctor! There was
nice music playing and everything was really clean
and shiny.
The doctor asked for many tests...but
everyone was so friendly! The lady who took
my blood for testing told me so many jokes
that I forgot to feel the pain!
...and have you
heard the one
about Batman
on Reality TV?
After the test results came, we went back to the
doctor. He looked through them and said everything
was fine, and I only had viral fever. He prescribed some
medicines and rest.
...and so young man ² this pink pill should be
taken three times a day, and the white tablet
once before bed time ² that·s for the
bodyache! This one is a syrup ² don·t
worry, it·s tasty
Thank you
Doctor...I feel
better
already!
17
You see, I·ve been dying to tell you all
about it! But what about
you? Which hospital did
you go to?
Um...it wasn·t as nice as your·s
at all! At first, Abba didn·t want
to take me because he said it
would take too much time...
When our turn came, the doctor examined me, and
asked for a blood test. Then we had to go and stand in
another long queue! People were crowding around in
the testing room too.
We got the test results after three days...and went
back to the hospital. There was a different doctor
that day.
Show me his OPD
card...and the test results
² quickly please!
He seems to be suffering from
a bout of viral fever ² nothing
to worry about.  All he needs
is this one fever-reducing
medicine.
My hospital was nice, but
they gave me many medicines
and the whole thing
cost quite a lot!
Oh! My treatment
did not cost much!
...and it really did! We went to a big
Government Hospital. We had to wait in a long
queue at the OPD counter. I was feeling so sick
that I had to lean on Abba all the time!
18
Social and Political Life
Where do you go when you are ill?
Are there any problems that you
face? Write a paragraph based on
your experience.
What problems did Aman face in
the government hospital? How do
you think the hospital can work in
a better manner? Discuss.
Why did Ranjan have to spend so
much money? Give reasons.
What problems do we face in
private hospitals? Discuss.
Public and private health care services
From the above story, you must have understood
that we can roughly divide up various health care
facilities in two categories ²
(a) Public health services and
(b) Private health facilities.
Public health services
The public health service is a chain of health centres
and hospitals run by the government. They are linked
together so that they cover both rural and urban
areas and can also provide treatment to all kinds of
problems ² from common illnesses to special services.
At the village level there are health centres where
there is usually a nurse and a village health worker.
They are trained in dealing with common illnesses
and work under the supervision of doctors at the
Primary Health Centre (PHC). Such a centre covers
many villages in a rural area. At the district level is
the District Hospital that also supervises all the health
centres. Large cities have many government hospitals
such as the one where Aman was taken and also
specialised government hospitals.
The health service is called ¶public· for many
reasons. In order to fulfil its commitment of providing
health care to all citizens, the government has
established these hospitals and health centres. Also,
the resources needed to run these services are
obtained from the money that we, the public, pay to
the government as taxes. Hence, such facilities are
meant for everyone. One of the most important
aspects of the public health system is that it is meant
to provide quality health care services either free or
at a low cost, so that even the poor can seek
treatment. Another important function of public
health is to take action to prevent the spread of
diseases such as TB, malaria, jaundice, cholera,
Why pay taxes to the government?
Government uses tax money for
providing many public services for
the benefit of all citizens. Some
services such as defence, police,
judicial system, highways etc.
benefit all citizens. Otherwise, the
citizens cannot organise these
services for themselves.
Taxes fund developmental
programmes and services such as
education, health care,
employment, social welfare,
vocational training etc. required for
needy citizens. Tax money is
utilised for relief and rehabilitation
in case of natural disasters such as
floods, earthquakes, tsunami etc.
Space, nuclear, and missile
programmes are also funded from
the revenues collected as taxes.
Government provides some
services especially for the poor
who cannot afford to purchase
them from the market. One
example is health care. Can you
give other examples?
19
In what ways is the public health
system meant for everyone?
List some Primary Health Centres
(PHCs) or hospitals near your place.
From your experience (or by
visiting any one of them), find out
the facilities provided and people
who run the centre.
A doctor in a rural health care centre
giving medicines to a patient.
diarrhoea, chikungunya, etc. This has to be
organised by the government with the participation
of people otherwise it is not effective. For example,
when taking up a campaign to see that mosquitoes
do not breed in water coolers, rooftops, etc., this
has to be done for all houses in the area.
According to our Constitution, it is the primary
duty of the government to ensure the welfare of the
people and provide health care facilities to all.
The government must safeguard the Right to Life
of every person. If a hospital cannot provide timely
medical treatment to a person, it means that this
protection of life is not being given.
The Court also said that it was the duty of the
government to provide the necessary health services,
including treatment in emergency situations.
Hospitals and medical staff must fulfil their duty of
providing the necessary treatment. Therefore, the
Court asked the State Government to give him the
money that he had spent on his treatment.
Private health facilities
There is a wide range of private health facilities that
exist in our country. A large number of doctors run
their own private clinics. In the rural areas, one
finds Registered Medical Practitioners (RMPs). Urban
areas have a large number of doctors, many of them
providing specialised services. There are hospitals
and nursing homes that are privately owned. There
are many laboratories that do tests and offer special
facilities such as X-ray, ultrasound, etc. There are
also shops from where we buy medicines.
As the name suggests, private health facilities
are not owned or controlled by the government.
Unlike the public health services, in private
facilities, patients have to pay a lot of money for
every service that they use.
A woman and her sick child at a
government hospital. According to
UNICEF, more than a million children
die every year in India from preventable
infections.
Chapter 2: Role of the Government in Health
20
Social and Political Life
Today the presence of private facilities can be seen
all around. In fact now there are large companies
that run hospitals and some are engaged in
manufacturing and selling medicines. Medical shops
are found in every corner of the country.
Healthcare and equality:
Is adequate healthcare available to all?
In India, we face a situation where private services
are increasing but public services are not. What is
then available to people are mainly private services.
These are concentrated in urban areas. The cost of
these services is rather high. Medicines are
expensive. Many people cannot afford them or have
to borrow money when there is an illness in the
family.
Some private services encourage incorrect
practices to earn more. At times inexpensive
alternatives, though available, may not be used. For
example, some medical practitioners are found to
prescribe superfluous medicines, injections or saline
when simple medication may suffice.
 In fact, barely 20 per cent of the population can
afford all the medicines that they require during an
illness. Hence, even for those whom one might not
20
Social and Political Life
Private health facilities can mean
many things. Explain with the help
of some examples from your area.
A post-operative room in a leading
private hospital in Delhi.
The Medical Council of India·s
Code of Medical Ethics states:
´Every physician should, as far as
possible, prescribe drugs with
generic names and he/she shall
ensure that there is a rational
prescription and use of drugs.µ
How can health care be made more
affordable? Discuss.
21
This pregnant lady has to travel many
kilometres to see a qualified doctor.
think as being poor, medical expenses cause
hardship. It was reported in a study that 40 per
cent of people who are admitted to a hospital for
some illness or injury have to borrow money or sell
some of their possessions to pay for the expenses.
For those who are poor, every illness in the family
is a cause of great anxiety and distress. What is worse
is that this situation tends to happen again and
again. Those who are poor are in the first place
undernourished. These families are not eating as
much as they should. They are not provided basic
necessities like drinking water, adequate housing,
clean surroundings, etc., and therefore, are more
likely to fall ill. The expenses on illness make their
situation even worse.
Sometimes it is not only the lack of money that
prevents people from getting proper medical
treatment. Women, for example, are not taken to a
doctor in a prompt manner. Women·s health
concerns are considered to be less important than
the health of men in the family. Many tribal areas
have few health centres and they do not run properly.
Even private health services are not available.
What can be done?
There is little doubt that the health situation of most
people in our country is not good. It is the
responsibility of the government to provide quality
healthcare services to all its citizens, especially the
poor and the disadvantaged. However, health is as
much dependent on basic amenities and social
conditions of the people, as it is on healthcare
services. Hence, it is important to work on both in
order to improve the health situation of our people.
And this can be done. Look at the following example.
Chapter 2: Role of the Government in Health
21
In rural areas, a jeep is often used to
serve as a mobile clinic for patients.
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
www.in.undp.org
22
Social and Political Life
The Kerala experience
In 1996, the Kerala government made some major
changes in the state. Forty per cent of the entire state
budget was given to panchayats. They could plan
and provide for their requirements. This made it
possible for a village to make sure that proper
planning was done for water, food, women·s
development and education. This meant that water
supply schemes were checked, the working of schools
and anganwadis was ensured and specific problems
of the village were taken up. Health centres were
also improved. All of this helped to improve the
situation. Despite these efforts, however, some
problems ² such as shortage of medicines,
insufficient hospital beds, not enough doctors ²
remained, and these needed to be addressed.
For more details, visit http://lsgkerala.gov.in/en
Let us look at an example of another country and
its approach to issues of health.
The Costa Rican approach
Costa Rica is considered to be one of the healthiest
countries in Central America. The main reason for
this can be found in the Costa Rican Constitution.
Several years ago, Costa Rica took a very important
decision and decided not to have an army. This
helped the Costa Rican government to spend the
money that the army would have used, on health,
education and other basic needs of the people. The
Costa Rican government believes that a country has
to be healthy for its development and pays a lot of
attention to the health of its people. The Costa Rican
government provides basic services and amenities
to all Costa Ricans. For example, it provides safe
drinking water, sanitation, nutrition and housing.
Health education is also considered very important
and knowledge about health is an essential part of
education at all levels.
The above map of India shows the state of
Kerala in pink.
Page 97 of this book has a map of India.
Using your pencil outline the state of
Kerala on this map.
23
Chapter 2: Role of the Government in Health
1.
In this chapter you have read that health is a wider concept
than illness. Look at this quote from the Constitution and
explain the terms ¶living standard· and ¶public health· in
your own words.
2.
 What are the different ways through which the government
can take steps to provide healthcare for all? Discuss.
3.
What differences do you find between private and public
health services in your area? Use the following table to
compare and contrast these.
EXERCISES
An important part of the
Constitution says it is the ´duty of
the State to raise the level of
nutrition and the standard of living
and to improve public health.µ
4.
¶Improvement in water and sanitation can control many
diseases.· Explain with the help of examples.
Glossary
Public: An activity or service that is meant for all people in the country and is mainly organised by the
government. This includes schools, hospitals, telephone services, etc. People can demand these
services and also raise questions about their non-functioning.
Private: An activity or service that is organised by an individual or company for their own gain.
Medical tourists: This refers to foreigners who come to this country specifically for medical treatment
at hospitals that offer world²class facilities at a lower cost than what they would have to pay in their
own countries.
Communicable diseases: These are diseases that are spread from one person to another in many
ways such as through water, food , air, etc.
OPD: This is the short form for ¶Out Patient Department·. This is where people are first brought in
and treated in a hospital without being admitted to any special ward.
Ethics: Moral principles that influence a person·s behaviour
Generic names: These are chemical names of the drugs. They help in identifying the ingredients.
They are globally recognised. For example, acetyl salicylic acid is the generic name of Aspirin.
Facility
Affordability
Availability
Quality
Private
Public
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
www.in.undp.org
24
Social and Political Life
How
the State
Government
Works
Last year, we discussed the
fact that government works at
three levels ² local, state and
national ² and looked at the
work of local government in
some detail. In this chapter,
we examine the work of the
government at the state
level. How does this take
place in a democracy?
What is the role of a
Member of the Legislative
Assembly (MLA) and
Ministers? How do people
express their views or
demand action from
government? We look at these
questions through the example
of health.
3
CHAPTER
WHOSE RESPONSIBILITY?
Hey, look at this...it says that
there is a water shortage in
our state, and people are
falling sick!
´...In many villages, people were found to be
drinking unclean water. Streams have dried up, and
so have tanks. In the worst-affected areas, villagers
have been carrying water across great distances.µ
´People at the district HQ Patalpuram receive water
supply once in three days. The District Hospital here is
overflowing with patients ² a large number of whom
are children with acute diarrhoea...µ
25
Who is an MLA?
In the above section, you have read about some
events in Patalpuram. You may be familiar with some
official names such as Collector, Medical Officer, etc.
But have you heard of an MLA and the Legislative
Assembly? Do you know the MLA of your area? Can
you identify which party she or he belongs to?
Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs) are
elected by the people. They then become members
of the legislative assembly and also form the
On the TV news, they said ten people
have died from diarrhoea! Is that
possible? Can one really die from it?
Who knows? Just
hope I don·t get it!
Ha ha!
My mother said not to have any iced
drinks from the market. She gave one of
her lectures this morning, ´You have to
be responsible for your health,
Shirin!µ
Suddenly...
STOP!
Really! Why? Has
he done something?
Shh...I saw him on TV
too. He is a member of
the Opposition!
What a loud voice he has...he must be
a leader or something...
...and we demand that the
authorities take immediate action to
bring the public health situation
under control! Our MLA must take
the responsibility for this!
This road is blocked due to the rally.
They have gheraoed the MLA·s  residence.
Ha ha ² they
seem more angry
about what he
hasn·t done!
What is happening in Patalpuram ?
Why is this problem serious?
What action do you think can be
taken in the above situation and
who do you think should take this
action? Discuss.
That afternoon...
25
Chapter 3: How the State Government Works
26
Social and Political Life
Discuss the following terms with
your teacher²public meeting,
States in India, constituency,
majority, ruling party and
opposition.
Can you explain the following
terms²majority, ruling party,
opposition with reference to your
state.
government. In this way we say that the MLAs
represent people. The example below will help us
understand this better.
Every state in India has a Legislative Assembly.
Each state is divided into different areas or
constituencies. For example, look at the map below.
It shows that the state of Himachal Pradesh is divided
into 68 assembly constituencies. From each
constituency, the people elect one representative who
then becomes a Member of the Legislative Assembly
(MLA). You would have noticed that people stand for
elections in the name of different parties. These MLAs,
therefore, belong to different political parties.
How do people who are MLAs become ministers or
chief minister? A political party whose MLAs have
won more than half the number of constituencies in
a state can be said to be in a majority. The political
party that has the majority is called the ruling party
and all other members are called the opposition. For
example, the Legislative Assembly of the state of
Himachal Pradesh has 68 MLA constituencies.
The state of  Himachal Pradesh is
coloured in purple in the above
thumbnail map of India.
Using a pencil outline the following on the
map given on page 97:
  (i) the state that you live in;
(ii) the state of Himachal Pradesh.
Jammu and Kashmir
Punjab
Uttarakhand
27
Construct a table, similar to the
one given for Himachal Pradesh,
for your state.
Results of the Assembly Elections in Himachal Pradesh in 2017
Political party
Number of MLAs elected
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) ............................................................. 44
Indian National Congress (INC) ................................................... 21
Communist Party of India (Marxist)............................................... 1
Independents (who don·t belong to any party) .......................... 2
Total ................................................................................ 68
The Head of the State is the Governor.
She/He is appointed by the Central
Government to ensure that the State
Government works within the rules and
regulations of the Constitution. Find out the
name of Governor of your State.
At times, the ruling party may not
be a single party but a group of
parties working together. This is
called a coalition. Discuss with
your teacher.
Candidates from various political parties won the
2017 assembly elections and became MLAs. Since
the total number of MLAs in the Legislative Assembly
is 68, a political party would have needed to have
more than 34 MLAs in order to gain a majority. The
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) with 44 MLAs had the
majority and it became the ruling party. All other MLAs
became the opposition. In this case, the Indian National
Congress (INC) was the major opposition party, since it
had the largest number of MLAs after the BJP. Among
the opposition were other parties, including those who
had been elected as independent candidates.
After the elections, the MLAs belonging to the
ruling party will elect their leader who will become
the chief minister. In this case, the BJP MLAs chose
Shri Jairam Thakur as their leader and he became
the chief minister. The chief minister then selects
other people as ministers. After the elections, it is
the Governor of the state who appoints the chief
minister and other ministers.
The chief minister and other ministers have the
responsibility of running various government
departments or ministries. They have separate offices.
A Legislative Assembly is a place where all the MLAs,
whether from the ruling party or from the opposition
meet to discuss various things. Hence, some MLAs
have dual responsibilities: one as an MLA and the
other as a minister. We will read about this further.
Chapter 3: How the State Government Works
For more details, visit http://hpvidhansabha.nic.in
28
Social and Political Life
A debate in the Legislative Assembly
Afreen, Sujata and many other students from their
school travelled to the state capital to visit the
Legislative Assembly which was housed in an
impressive building. The children were excited. After
security checks, they were taken upstairs. There was
a gallery from where they could see the large hall
below. There were rows and rows of desks.
 This Assembly was going to have a debate on a
current problem. During this time, MLAs can express
their opinions and ask questions related to the issue
or give suggestions about what should be done by
the government. Those who wish to, can respond to
this. The minister then replies to the questions and
tries to assure the Assembly that adequate steps are
being taken.
 The chief minister and other ministers have to
take decisions and run the government. We usually
hear about them or see them in the news channels
or in the papers. However, whatever decisions are
being taken have to be approved by the members of
the legislative assembly. In a democracy, these
members can ask questions, debate an important
issue, decide where money should be spent, etc. They
have the main authority.
MLA 1: In my constituency of Akhandagaon,
during the last three weeks, there were 15 deaths
because of diarrhoea. I think it is a shame that this
government has not been able to check the situation
of a simple problem like diarrhoea while proclaiming
itself to be a champion of technology. I would call
the attention of the minister in charge of health to
take immediate measures to control the situation.
MLA 2: My question is why are government
hospitals in such a bad situation? Why is the
government not appointing proper doctors and other
medical staff in the district? I would also like to know
how the government plans to deal with this situation
28
Social and Political Life
29
Can you identify the MLAs of the
ruling party and the opposition in
the illustration? Colour the ruling
party in one colour and the
opposition in another.
which is affecting a large number of people and is
also spreading. This is an epidemic.
MLA 3: My constituency of Tolpatti too has a
serious shortage of water. Women travel up to 3 or 4
kilometres to collect water. How many tankers have
been put into service to supply water? How many
wells and ponds have been cleaned and disinfected?
MLA 4: I think my colleagues are exaggerating the
problem. The government has taken steps to control
the situation. Water tankers have been put into
service. ORS packets are being distributed. The
government is doing everything possible to help
people.
MLA 5: We have very poor facilities in our hospitals.
There are hospitals that do not have a doctor and no
medical staff has been appointed for the last few
years. In another hospital, the doctor has gone on a
long leave. This is a shame. I think the situation is
going from bad to worse. How are we going to
ensure that ORS packets reach all families in the
affected areas?
MLA 6: The opposition members are unnecessarily
blaming the government. The previous government
did not pay any attention to sanitation. We have now
taken up a drive to clear the garbage that has been
lying around for years.
1
2
5
3
4
6
30
Social and Political Life
What were the main arguments
put forward by different MLAs
who thought that the government
was not taking the situation in a
serious manner?
If you were the health minister,
how would you respond to the
above discussion?
Do you think the above debate
would have been useful in some
ways? How? Discuss.
In the working of the government,
explain the difference between
being an MLA and an MLA who is
also a minister.
In the earlier section you have read about a debate
in the Legislative Assembly. The members were
debating the action taken or not taken by the
government. This is because the MLAs are together
responsible for the work of the government. In
common usage the word ¶government· refers to
government departments and various ministers who
head them. The overall head is the chief minister.
More correctly, this is called the executive part of
the government. All the MLAs who gather together
(assemble) in the legislative assembly are called the
Legislature. They are the ones who authorise and
supervise their work. As we saw in the earlier section,
it is from among them that the head of the executive,
or the chief minister is formed.
Working of the government
The Legislative Assembly is not the only place where
opinions are expressed about the work of the
government and action is demanded. You will find
newspapers, TV channels and other organisations
regularly talking about the government. In a
democracy, there are various ways through which
people express their views and also take action. Let
us look at one such way.
Soon after the discussion in the assembly, there
was a press conference organised by the health
minister. Large numbers of people from different
newspapers were present. The minister and some
government officials were also present. The minister
explained the steps the government had taken.
Reporters asked many questions at this meeting.
These discussions were then reported in different
newspapers. The following page has one such report.
During the next week, the chief minister and the
minister for health visited Patalpuram district. They
went to visit the families who had lost their relatives
and also visited people in the hospitals. The
government announced a compensation for these
31
Write two measures that the
goverment undertook for
controlling diarrhoea?
What is the purpose of a
press conference? How does
the press conference help you
get information on what the
goverment is doing?
families. The chief minister also said that he thought
the problem was not only one of sanitation but also
of a lack of clean drinking water. He said that a high-
level enquiry committee will be asked to look into
the needs of the district to provide sanitation facilities
and would request the minister for Public Works to
take care of the needs of proper water supply in the
region.
As you saw above, the people in power like the
chief minister and the minister have to take action.
They do so through various departments like the
Public Works Department, the Agriculture
Department, the Health Department, the Education
Department and so on. They also have to answer
questions that are asked in the Legislative Assembly
and convince people asking the questions that proper
steps are being taken. At the same time, newspapers
and the media widely discuss the issue and the
government has to respond, for example, by holding
the press conferences.
During the last few weeks,
there have been many
deaths in some districts of
our state. There has been a
strong reaction that the
government has not taken
this seriously. The health
minister explained today at
a press conference that his
government has asked all
the collectors and the chief
medical officers to take
urgent measures. The most
important problem is that
of drinking water. The
minister said that they
intend to supply drinking
water to every village
through tanker trucks.
The chief minister has
promised funds for this
work. They also plan to
start a campaign to inform
people about the steps that
can be taken to prevent
diarrhoea. When a reporter
asked him as to what steps
are being taken to see that
garbage that has been lying
around for months is
quickly collected, the chief
minister said that he would
look into this.
Patalpuram | Ravi Ahuja
Chapter 3: How the State Government Works
In a democracy, people organise meetings
to voice their opinions and protest
against the government.
 The government can also decide to make new laws
for the state regarding sanitation and health facilities.
For example, it may make it compulsory for
municipal corporations to ensure that there are
adequate toilets in every urban area. It may also
ensure that a health worker is appointed in every
village. This act of making laws on certain issues is
done in the Legislative Assembly of each state. The
various government departments then implement
these laws. Laws for the entire country are made in
the Parliament. You will read more about the
Parliament next year.
In a democracy, it is the people who elect their
representatives as Members of the Legislative
Assembly (MLAs) and, thus, it is the people who have
the main authority. The ruling party members then
form the government and some members are
appointed ministers. These ministers are in charge
of various departments of the government such as
health in the above example. Whatever work is done
by these departments has to be approved by the
members of the legislative assembly.
Find out with the help of your
teacher, the work done by the
government departments
mentioned above, and fill in the
table.
Name of department
Examples of their work
School Education
Public Works Department
Agriculture
After introducing the topic and having a brief discussion
with the whole class, the teacher divides the class into groups.
The group discusses the issue and decides what it would like
to include in the wall-paper. Children then work
individually or in pairs to read the collected material and
write their observations or experiences. They can do this
through creating stories, poems, case studies, interviews, etc.
The group looks at the material that they have
selected, drawn or written. They read each otherĬs
writing and provide feedback to each other. They
make decisions on what should be included and
finalise the layout for the wallpaper.
A wallpaper project
A wallpaper is an interesting activity through which
research can be done on particular topics of interest.
The following photographs explain the different
aspects involved in creating a wallpaper in a
classroom.
Chapter 3: How the State Government Works
33
Each group then presents the wallpaper to the entire class. It is important that
more than one member of the group is asked to present and that each group is
allotted the same amount of time to discuss their work. After each group has
presented, it would be a good idea to have a feedback session on the following ĩ
What more could they do on their own? How could their work be organised
better? How could writing and presentation be improved upon?
Do a similar wallpaper project
about any issue connected with
the working of your State
Government like an  education
programme, any law and order
issue, midday meal scheme, etc.
This wallpaper about the 2006
dengue epidemic was prepared by
children of Class VI B of Kendriya
Vidyalaya II, Hindon, Ghaziabad,
Uttar Pradesh.
34
Social and Political Life
1.
Use the terms ¶constituency· and ¶represent· to explain
who an MLA is and how is the person elected?
2.
How did some MLAs become Ministers? Explain.
3.
Why should decisions taken by the Chief Minister and
other ministers be debated in the Legislative Assembly?
4.
What was the problem in Patalpuram? What discussion/
action was taken by the following? Fill in the table.
EXERCISES
Public meeting
Legislative Assembly
Press conference
Chief Minister
Glossary
Constituency: A particular area from which all the voters living there choose their representatives.
This could be, for example, a panchayat ward or an area that chooses an MLA.
Majority: This is a situation when more than half the number in a group supports a decision or an
idea. This is also called a simple majority.
Opposition: This refers to elected representatives who are not members of the ruling party and
who play the role of questioning government decisions and actions as well as raise new issues for
consideration in the Assembly.
Press Conference: A gathering of journalists from the media who are invited to hear about and
ask questions on a particular issue and are then expected to report on this to the larger public.
5.
What is the difference between the work that MLAs do in
the Assembly and the work done by government
departments?
Chapter 3: How the State Government Works
35
UNIT
THREE
Gender
Teacher·s note
Gender is a term that you may often have
heard. It is a term, however, that is not
easily understood. It tends to remain
distant from our lives and restricted to
discussions during training programmes.
In fact, it is something that all of us
experience in our lives on a daily basis. It
determines, for example, who we are and
what we will become, where we can go and
where not, the life choices available to us
and those we eventually make. Our
understanding of gender is often based on
the family and society that we live in. This
leads us to think that the roles we see men
and women around us play are fixed and
natural. In fact, these roles differ across
communities around the world. By gender,
then, we mean the many social values and
stereotypes our cultures attach to the
biological distinction ¶male· and ¶female·. It
is a term that helps us to understand many
of the inequalities and power relations
between men and women in society.
The following two chapters explore the
concept of gender without actually using
the term. Instead, through different
pedagogic tools like case studies, stories,
classroom activities, data analysis and
photographs, students are encouraged to
question and think about their own lives
and the society around them. Gender is
often mistakenly thought to be something
that concerns women or girls alone. Thus,
care has been taken in these chapters to
draw boys into the discussion as well.
Chapter 4 uses two case studies, situated
in different places and points in time to
show how girls and boys are brought up
or socialised differently. This enables them
to understand that the process of
socialisation is not uniform; instead it is
socially determined and changes
continuously over time. The chapter also
addresses the fact that societies assign
different values to the roles men and
women play and the work they do, which
becomes a basis for inequality and
discrimination. Through a storyboard,
students discuss the issue of housework.
Done primarily by women, housework is
often not considered ¶work· and, therefore
made invisible and devalued.
 Chapter 5 further develops ideas around
gender inequalities in the world of work and
describes women·s struggles for equality.
Through a classroom activity, students
begin questioning existing stereotypes
regarding work and career choices. The
chapter also points out that opportunities
like education are not equally available to
boys and girls. By reading about the lives
of two Indian women, from the ninteenth
and twentieth centuries, students see how
women struggled to change their lives by
learning to read and write. Change on a
large scale usually takes place through
collective struggles. The chapter concludes
with a photo-essay that gives examples of
different strategies the women·s movement
has used to fight for change.
37
---CHUNK---

---CHUNK---
